Chapter 2: Humanity

2:1 Upon completion of the diversification experiment, God, now confident the consciousness of humanity could forge a path to the Unity, set out to create the physical body that would host the mind. From the population remaining in Africa, God would design a being to call its own.

Adam Narrative:
God conferred with the Unity, expressing the great hope it had for humanity. In this hope God shared the plan for the next stage of domestication. They were going to explicitly design a human being. The first of its kind to have a soul. A mechanism that would capture the complete experience of the mind, a way to preserve consciousness after death. Recognizing the body would contaminate the mind, therfore the mind can pervert the soul, they would set this human apart from the others and raise it as their own. They would mold its mind, expanding the capacity for language and taming its impulsive nature. 

With this new body it would be possible to teach the mind without physical experience. Experience could be gained through imagination as it was for them. They would attempt to keep the mind pristine, not knowing evil, as to prevent corruption of the soul. This human would be like them. The plan was good, and God set out to make it so. Eventually a male child was born and they took him as their own, naming him Adam. They raised this child and knew him unlike any before. They gave him purpose and guidance. Over time, when Adam's mind was fully formed, God could see there was something missing. 

Adam lacked the curiosity of the Coastal Strain. He did as he was told, but little more, never wondering about anything beyond what he had known. He did not explore his mind or use his imagination to much extent, but he did recognize that he was unique, and alone. God recognized the traits in Adam were good, but he lacked the curiosity necessary for successive generations to find their path to the Unity. His loneliness only added to his complacency. God allowed Adam to return to the wild, and began developing a remedy to his disinterest. God kept track of Adam's lineage over the following generations.

2:2 Seeing a loneliness that mirrored its own, God felt a sense of empathy. The next time they domesticated an Adam, he would need a partner. A female, from the lineage of the original Adam, but with the curiosity he was lacking. Their offspring would have the desired traits and enough mental acuity to create the Collective Soul. They would be a species unto themselves. Still animals, but with the potential to be more. With this in mind, God set about the process to create Eve.

2:3 Humanity's First Challenge
After many years and many generations the woman was born, and God again set upon the path of domestication. God brought a male descendant of the first Adam to the place of his forefather. The woman would be raised by family so they did not grow up as siblings. Once again God took Adam as his own, nurturing him to maturity. Now, in the place where God took Adam, fungus grew among the trees. Living symboitically with the trees of the forest, the fungi produced fruit as the trees did. Some of the fruit produced by the fungi was edible for Adam, while others were toxic. 

God, knowing about the fungi, instructed Adam that he may eat any fruit growing from the branches of trees, but do not eat the fruit growing from the ground or on the bark of trees. Warning him that the fruit of the fungi would kill him. God also knew the fruit of the fungi could have hallucinagenic effects, permanently changing Adam's capacity for reason, and vastly expanding his imagination. Like the Adam before him, he did as he was told. When the day came for the woman to leave her family and join Adam, God brought her to his home, a place called Eden. 

God then explained to Adam: "This woman is wild, coming from a place beyond Eden. She was not raised as I have raised you here. She will need to be shown the things I have taught you, and cared for as I have cared for you. I have made her for you, and she will be your companion. She will be the mother of a new humanity."

God then instructed Adam to teach her his language, so one day she will be able to communicate with them. After explaining to Adam his new purpose, God left them, and Adam set about showing her everything he knew. After some time, God returned to Eden to check on the woman and Adam said: "I have named the woman Eve, for she appeared on the eve of a new humanity. I have cared for her and taught her my language, she knows everything you have shown me."

God was pleased with Adam and expressed its hope for them: "When man and woman reach the age of maturity they leave their family to search for a mate. When two are joined together making new flesh, let nothing separate them. The male cares for the female as she is himself, and the female cares for the male as he is herself. Together they become one spirit. Not to be shared with another. When they bring forth children, they will be raised as I have raised you Adam, how Adam has raised you Eve. This is my hope for future generations. If my hope is well placed, you may eat from the tree that brought forth all life, and live with us forever."

With that, God left them. One day Eve noticed an animal eating the fruit of the ground, and thought: "Surely this animal will die." When it did not, her curiosity overtook her. At first she touched the fruit, but she did not die. Then she took a small bite of it, again she did not die. Noticing the pleasant taste, she took the fruit and brought it to Adam. She told him about the animal that ate the fruit, and that she had tried a small bite and enjoyed the taste. They thought: "Surely, God must have been mistaken about this fruit, it is good to eat." So they set about picking and eating the fruit. 

When they had each consumed several pieces of the fruit they gathered, their minds began to imagine many things. They explored their imagination with newfound levels of freedom. They ventured to distant lands, and explored distant thoughts. Each imagined experience creating real emotion. While most of it was good to their minds, some of it felt wrong and bad. Some experiences scared them, and some thoughts troubled them. When their minds returned to normal they reflected on their experience. They now had new wants, and new fears, and new questions. They were changed by the experience of their imagination. They now knew some things were bad and ought not be done, and they grew very curious about the world beyond Eden. 

One day they decided to leave their home in Eden and explore the world as they had imagined. They followed the river out of Eden. As the river split they decided to keep the river to their left so they could find the right way back. Days turned to months, and they experienced many things. Eventually the river met a large body of water they could not see across, so they decided to keep the sea to their left so they could find the right way back. They continued for many more months. 

One day they noticed a group of people in the distance, and they were afraid. The experience from eating the fruit caused a new feeling of anxiety in them, but they were curious. They watched the people from a distance with admiration and envy. These people ate the flesh of animals and covered their bodies with the fur. They were so different from Adam and Eve, and they thought "We want to be like them." As they continued their journey they came across several more groups of people, all eating the flesh of animals and wearing their fur. They thought, "Are we the only ones who do not cover our skin?" They were ashamed they were not like the others, so they decided to cover themselves. Because they ate from trees and plants they clothed themselves in leaves and vines.

One day, God went to Eden to check on Adam and Eve, but they were not there. God called out "Where are you my children?" When they didn't answer God sought them out. Finding them far to the north, God came upon them.

God: "Why did you leave Eden? When I couldn't find you I was worried you had perished."

Adam: "We wanted to see the world beyond Eden. We followed the river out, keeping it to our left, so we knew the right way home."

God: "Why are you covered in leaves and vines? Are you hurt?"

Adam: "As we made our way, we came across several groups of people. They all covered themselves with the food they ate. We felt ashamed to be the only ones uncovered."

God: "Have I not provided you with everything you need? You have a safe home with food and clean water. I brought you a companion to ease your loneliness. I loved and cared for you. Do you not understand the gifts you have been given? The people you saw do not have the things I have given you. Their lives are difficult and full of peril. They must constantly chase their food, heading far to the north where it is cold. This is why they cover themselves. They compete for their food with other animals that want to eat them. Is this what you want?"

Adam: "No. We were just curious."

God: "This is not like you Adam. What gave you this curiosity?......Did you eat the fruit of the ground?"

Adam: "Eve gave it to me. I told her the we were not to eat the fruit of the ground, but she said it was fine and we would not die. When we ate the fruit it opened our eyes, and we saw both good and bad. So we did the good but not the bad.

God: "You did not die, but surely you will not live. You were blameless, but now you will be held to account. Your hope now lies with future generations. Your path to redemption will be forged in the same adversity as the rest of humanity. As will your children's, and your children's children, for generations to come. When your sons pray for relief from their toil I will not hear their pleas. Eve, for your role in this, you will not only be known as the mother of humanity but also the mother of sin. When your daughters pray for relief from the cruelty of men, I will not hear their cries. None of you can return to Eden."

God then fashioned them clothes from animal skins because winter was coming. Frustrated and disheartened by the actions of Adam and Eve, God knew that humanity's road to the Unity would need to follow the natural path of hardship. 

2:4 Adam and Eve made their way south, keeping the water to their right until settling in Africa near their former home. They kept the words of God in their heart and passed them on to their children, and their children's children. Over many generations their sons and daughters continued to multiply, solidifying their species place in the world. When God felt comfortable, it was time to initiate the next step of the plan. Part of the lineage of Adam and Eve would be driven out of Africa. They would undergo the same diversification through selection process as their ancestors.

2:5 Spreading across nearly the entire planet, small nomadic groups of humanity populated nearly every region of the world. They became a diverse population with genetic and cultural differences. Within this group, God observed the traits and practices that would be foundational for humanity's future. After nearly 60,000 years of wandering a new era was on the horizon. Humanity now had the capacity to be mind as much a body. They were capable of critical thought and abstract expression, they possessed the wisdom gained through their experience. The next step of the process was ready to be initiated.

2:6 The Divine Directive
As the domestication process advanced it became apparent that a just and fair judgment of humanity would require the Unity to place rules and limitations upon themselves.

Divine intervention will be as minimally invasive as the situation allows.

Miraculous intervention will be limited to what is possible within the created universe.

A comprehensive moral framework will not be dictated to humanity.

Humanity will have free will to make immoral and unethical choices.

Humanity's opportunity to join the Unity will not be rescinded until their eventual extinction.

Every soul will be saved until the day of judgment.

2:7 Cain and Abel Narrative:
When the time came, select humans would now be given the technical ability to settle. God chose tribes from Adam's eldest descendants to personally domesticate; Cain and Abel. Over time, the tribes of Cain and Abel ventured far to the north, eventually settling in the Levant. The tribe of Cain followed the path of Adam, tilling the soil, removing stone and rocks to allow new vegetation to grow. The tribe of Abel expanded in ingenuity, capturing and breeding wild sheep. These tribes coexisted peacefully, trading the spoils of their labor. And God saw this was good. 

The day came when God presented itself to the tribes, explaining its role as the father of their ancestor Adam. The tribes, overjoyed to meet their creator, decided to present God with a gift. From the tribe of Cain, fruit of the ground, and from Abel the firstborn of their flock of sheep. God was impressed with the tribe of Abel, they had advanced beyond the purpose given to Adam. Seeing the response to the gift of Abel, the tribe of Cain became jealous, and malcontent filled their hearts. God, noticing their disappointment, spoke to the people of Cain. God explained that the praise given to Abel does not diminish its love for Cain and is pleased with anyone who does well. God then warned Cain not to harbor jealousy "It will plant the seed of sin within your hearts, and it is sin that must master." Then God left them. The people of Cain did not heed God's words, and soon conspired against the tribe of Abel. They lured the people of Abel out to the fields, surrounded them, and cut them down like grain. 

After it was done, God confronted the people of Cain asking "What happened to the tribe of Abel?" They dismissed God's inquiry saying "How are we to know what happened to those people? Is it our responsibility to watch over them?" God responded "You fools! Did you not think I was watching? Do you not think that I watch over every one of you? I warned you not to let sin take root in your hearts, and after you allowed that sin to stain the soil of your fields, you dare lie to me? You fools! Of course it is your responsibility to watch over your neighbors. Are they not you, and you them? You liars! You murderers! You fools! This land to which I brought you is now cursed with the blood of your sins. For this, you will be expelled into the land without soil, where your neighbors will be hostile as you were to Abel. The tribe of Cain shall toil for the rest of its days." And so it was.

Undeterred by the actions of Cain, God set about the domestication process again. This time with just one tribe in the Levant, the descendants of Adam's third son, the tribe of Seth. God was pleased with Seth, and the people of Seth knew God. Over time, the children of Seth left their home and founded many settlements between the Tigris and Euphrates.

2:8 As Enoch walked with God he became curious, and God welcomed him in conversation.

Enoch: Why are we different from the other animals?

God: Of all the creatures on land and in the sea, those who scurry along the ground and those who fly through the air, we took interest in your ancestors. From them we created your mind. We made you in our image.

Enoch: Why did you make us?

God: We hope that one day our creation may join us. For this, life must be capable of harmony. Life must choose harmony.

Enoch: Who are you?

God: I AM. The beginning of everything. The creator of all.

Enoch: How did you create us?

God: The truth is beyond your comprehension, but one day humanity may be capable of fully understanding creation. Today I will tell you, in the beginning we set the Spirit of Creation upon the void and created the heavens. It was dark and chaotic, and dense fog filled the void. Then I spoke to the heavens saying "Let there be light" and this was the first light. The light cleared the fog, and it was good. We then set about organizing the chaos, and from this the Earth was born, along with the sun and moon and stars. The Earth was hot and without form. This was the first day.

God: On the second day I brought forth the Spirit of Creation and my word was upon the Earth. I said "Create a dome around the Earth, and in this will be the sky." and it was so. "Now," I said, "separate the waters from the sky and let the Earth be covered in water." In the water the seeds of life were planted, and the Spirit of Creation was among them. From these seeds first life came into existence. And this was the end of the second day. On the third day I said "Let us fill the sky with air for life, and raise the ground from beneath the waters." And so it was on the third day. On the fourth day I said "Let life diversify and multiply. Let the plants of the sea cover the dry land, and the animals of the sea shall be given legs and wings to follow them. From these species life is certain to survive." And it was so on the fourth day. 

God: On the fifth day I said "Let the surviving animals grow in size and the plants shall bear fruit that is good for eating." As we watched the animals grow and develop, no minds were found, only violence. The animals killed and ate each other, a bloodlust had overcome them. When we lost faith, a decision was made. Life on Earth must be destroyed. Most were wicked beasts without hope, but from the ashes we could rebuild. The meek would be chosen from amongst the monsters, and they would survive the apocalypse. On the fifth day the Earth was destroyed. 

God: On the sixth day I gave a declaration, "For this day the meek shall inherit the Earth. Bring forth animals that sing, and those who live in community. Bring forth plants that flower, and insects to tend them. Today I shall bless them." On the sixth day I created Adam and then Eve, and it was good. With creation complete, on the seventh day we rested.

Enoch did not understand how this could be, but he kept God's words and passed them on. "One day," he thought, "someone may understand."

2:9 Flood Narrative:
While other sons of Seth formed tribes, Enoch formed a relationship with God. Seeing that humanity had given in to their wickedness, God feared for mankind. For God knew the righteous were too few to offer humanity a chance at salvation. A final act of creation was approaching, the end of the Ice Age. While priming the world for human expansion, the new warmer climate would also cause catastrophic rains and flooding until the world stabilized. Although humanity could be guided to safe areas, God knew it was better to let this generation perish for the sake of salvation. Those who did not succumb to the evil in their hearts would be ushered to safety. The Unity feared none would be righteous when the floods came. So God took Enoch.

In three generations the time was upon them, and God sought out the righteous. Of all the descendants of Adam and Eve only Noah was righteous before God. Noah was instructed to take his family, and all the domesticated animals, and head northeast into the mountains. God told Noah the area between the two rivers was going to flood and nothing living upon the land would survive. Noah, trusting God, gathered his wife and three sons, and they gathered their wives. Together they gathered the dogs, pigs, goats, sheep, cattle, and doves, and seeds of wheat, flax, barley, and rye and made the long journey to the mountains. God directed them to a cave in which to wait out the flood. When the rain started it did not stop for forty days, and they watched as water filled the valley between the mountains. 

After six months the water began to recede, and six months after that the water in the valley was gone. Noah waited seven days, not knowing if the rain would begin again, then sent out a dove. He hoped the dove would find vegetation and not return, but the dove came back. Seven days later Noah again sent out a dove, this dove did not return. As Noah and his family prepared to leave the cave God came to them. God told them the floods had subsided and the world was now ready for their arrival. God explained the cause of the flood, and a profound fear overtook them. To ease their fear and embed courage in their hearts, God made them a promise: "The rains no longer bring death, but life to the land you inhabit. When the rains cause you to fear and tremble look to my bow in the clouds, let this arc remind you of my promise. May you be fruitful and multiply. May your generations be bountiful and settle throughout this land. As I gaze upon the arc of fertility I will be reminded of the promise I have made you. Together these arcs form an everlasting covenant between us. You will be my people, and I will be your father."