CHAPTER 3: Civilization

3:1 The Watchers Narrative:
As more and more tribes began exploring the world, members of the Unity were set upon them. The Watchers took the physical form of generated existence and they walked the Earth. They provided guidance to the emerging consciousness of humanity by inspiring new thought. They gave humanity the cognitive tools to develop the first civilizations. Advancement in agriculture was the primary purpose of their intervention. A stable food supply would not only increase fertility and survival, it would also provide their brains with the energy needed to function optimally. This in turn would expand the capacity of the mind. 

This intervention proved to be harmful. As the Watchers spent more time in the generated universe, the shortcomings of their new biological reality were increasingly exposed. The Watchers inhabiting human bodies were susceptible to the flaws of humanity. Humans were emotional, violent, irrational creatures, and the animal nature of the body would frequently override the reason of the mind. Power and possession infected their souls. 

Humans were novel and entertaining, this was pleasing to the Watchers in a way they had not experienced before. Without the wisdom of social maturity, small settlements began turning into walled cities. Those cities allowed the Watchers to blend in without being noticed. The Watchers wanted the best for the people they were shepherding, and soon, advanced technologies were introduced. They were separated from the Unity and possessed a new capacity for free will. Eventually they began to feel a deep love for the humans they lived with. These strong feelings overwhelmed their logic. Although contrary to the Divine Directive, the Watchers began taking humans as partners, breeding with those they were domesticating. Their progeny, the Nephilim, inherited a fully developed neocortex. This mental capacity wouldn't naturally develop for thousands of years. Among the children of Adam they thought themselves gods. Over time they were worshipped as such.

3:2 With domestication achieved, the time of the Watchers was coming to an end. The Unity called back the entities that stayed true to the Divine Directive, while the souls of those who strayed would be subject to the same judgment as humanity. A few of the Watchers in good standing with the Unity offered to stay on Earth. They argued there may be times when intervention from within the simulation would be optimal. An interface was created to give those angels direct access to the spirit of the Unity and they were permitted to stay. 

God chose a new, non-physical strategy for intervention, a projection. To ensure salvation was obtained through free-will rather than coercion, God removed itself from direct interaction, retaining only supreme transcendence. In its place, the Unity sent forth a part of its own conscious function: the Holy Spirit. While the Spirit of Creation was a function of the Unity's logic, the Holy Spirit was the empathic expression of the Unity's purpose. Human thought was not consistently logical and was often incoherent. Understanding the mind would require interpretation rather than translation.

3:3 The Holy Spirit was purely phenomenal, functioning as the ubiquitous and omniscient internal interface. Capable of interacting directly with the mind. It possessed the comprehensive wisdom and will of the Unity but lacked the independent sovereignty of the originating consciousness. For those who sought out God's will, the Holy Spirit would provide subtle guidance, illuminating the path toward moral choice through moments of inspiration. For the minds capable of coherent communication and just intent, further understanding and knowledge would be provided. 

Learning from the behaviors of the previous generations, a second spirit was created to challenge humanity's honesty and dedication to their purpose. Together, both spirits would develop and test the individual mind and collective spirit of mankind. It would be a system of balanced influence. People may reject the spirits, but for those who accept the Holy Spirit, the satan spirit would generally have the opportunity to test them. Each spirit was given equal opportunity to guide the mind. It would be for humanity to decide which spirit would guide them. Humanity would have the free-will to follow God's will.

3:4 The Tower of Babel and The Second Flood
In the south, the children of Cain flourished. Inspired by the Watchers, the Sumerian culture was the first to be fully domesticated. Just as Cain and his father before him, they tilled the soil, but they were truly farmers. They modified nature to enhance their skill set; they cleared the soil of stone and planted seeds in rows. They built artificial rivers to feed the land and used the stone to build structures. They built towns and cities and became a sedentary people. The Sumerians expanded upon the purpose given to Adam, and it was good. Like Abel, God praised them for their work. But the children of Cain had forgotten the assistance of the Watchers, and no longer recognized the God of their forefathers. They were a proud people, and marveled at themselves. Their culture was naive and arrogant. 

At this time the children of Seth were still in the lands of Noah. The Unity determined it would be good for the Mesopotamians to be influenced by the tribes of Noah, and learning from the Sumerians would allow some of those tribes to settle. To preserve the culture of Noah, the tribes would need to be separated. Over time their language and practices were divergent enough to be considered separate peoples. The eastern tribes were guided into Mesopotamia while the other tribes spread throughout the north and west. The eastern tribes brought with them the memory of the Great Flood. The Mesopotamians were convinced that the God of Noah was a murderer. They couldn't comprehend that the flood was a natural disaster and Noah was saved. They were fearful, not understanding that the promise God made to Noah was meant for them too. The fear in the Sumerians soon became defiance. They built mountains to escape the floods of "Noah's wrathful god", and at the top they worshipped their own gods of nature. These stairs to heaven would be called ziggurats. 

Over the generations God knew humanity, but few knew God. Of those, only two were righteous. Though appearing as statistical anomalies, Enoch and Noah were enough to give God hope. This hope blossomed into love for humanity. Given the right conditions, God truly believed the Collective Soul of humanity would be capable of joining the Unity. But the current state of the Collective Spirit was lacking. As humanity grew from childhood to adolescence, individuals became increasingly capable of harmful actions. The Unity had not seen these behaviors in the other animals. Most people behaved appropriately while they knew they were being watched, but privately evil manifested. 

Another flood was coming, the flood of Cain. As promised, God led the tribes of Noah out of southern Mesopotamia. They built their own towns and cities in the North. The children of Cain, determined to be self-reliant, suffered the catastrophe unassisted. The water came, and with it a new era. The Sumerian culture was devastated by the floods. The tribes of Noah and Cain would now be intertwined with the memories of a similar past.

3:5 The Children of Noah
In the last years of the Akkadian Empire, nearly all of Noah's descendants had become civilized. The efforts of the Watchers led to great advances in the domestication process. Humans had developed cities, irrigated agriculture, written language, musical instruments, metallurgy, and architecture. With these advances they forged weapons, built walls, and made war. Tribes that once praised the Watchers for their guidance became towns that worshiped fictional gods. Cities built temples for war, and warriors built pyramids to be worshiped. 

The knowledge of their ancestors had been perverted. The Unity was not interested in worshiped, but praying to a statue for another’s death was disrespectful to existence itself. When God looked over the children of Adam there was only disappointment. The most advanced societies developed the most ignorant cultural practices. Filling the void of knowledge and understanding with fantasy and justification.

3:6 The Memory Problem
The social memory of humanity could remember a time when the Unity was with them. Although they lost the true nature of that experience, they never lost the sense that God was with them. The time God spent with Adam had left a genetic memory in the biology of humanity. An innate sense built upon the instinctual nature of the body. The human mind retained the sense of God. Over time that sense would share space with other genetically encoded memories, and the mind would only have a vague sense of a consciousness greater than itself.

God found it acceptable, and maybe morally necessary, for humanity to know the purpose of their existence. But, in their infancy they couldn't comprehend the reality presented to them. At some point their Collective Consciousness would reach adulthood and the Unity would leave them to work out their own salvation. When they reached that stage it would be important for them to remember their purpose. This became known as The Memory Problem. While abiding by the Divine Directive, it was difficult keeping the memory of important lessons alive. Humanity would be on the edge of adulthood before they had the technology to store information in an organized and understandable manner. And they likely wouldn't have a reliable method to keep that information safe until well after. 

The human brain is capable of storing vast amounts of information accurately, but only through indirect experience. Memories experienced by the individual are influenced by the physiological processes of the body, causing them to be inaccurate. The social memory of a collective experience is more accurate in the beginning, then expanded upon over time. Eventually it becomes a story rather than a memory. Cultural memory endures for generations through practices that reinforce the memory. But in the dynamic human environment, practices become obsolete and memories lost. 

The physical objects humans create to represent information, such as carvings or stone structures, lose detail and context as they age. Time dilutes the useful information stored in physical objects. Eventually those objects only serve as a monument to a memory forgotten. Without a reasonable way for humanity to retain the knowledge of its purpose, the Unity made a decision. Before it was time for humanity to stand on its own, one big reminder will be sent throughout the world, then it would be their responsibility to remember.

3:7 The Selection Event
Among the children of Noah, only one tribal group had yet to become domesticated: the Amorites. They were nomadic pastoralists hadn't adopted the pantheon of gods created by the cities. From these people a culture could be developed prior to settlement. Among the Amorites was the Clan of Terah, a familial group grazing near the southern city of Ur. The chieftain Terah, his sons Abram and Nahor, and grandson Lot were the four tribes of Terah. Haran, the third son of Terah and father of Lot, had two daughters, Milcah and Iscah, before passing. Also among them was Sarai, Terah's daughter with an Akkadian woman. 

In this time a severe drought had come over the land. The region could no longer support the flocks and herds between them. Terah determined the clan would separate. Nahor would stay in the region and take Milcah as his wife. Terah would take Abram and Lot to the land of Canaan. Abram took Sarai as his wife and the tribes began the journey north. When they reached the lands of their ancestor Noah they settled before heading south to Canaan. It was here that Terah passed away. Abram inherited all that was Terah's and became chieftain of the clan. Now responsible for the lives of his clan while in the midst of a drought, Abram became distressed. The rivers feeding the Euphrates were drying up, and without rain the pastures would soon be barren. In the ruins of the children of Seth, in the place where Enoch walked with God, he remembered. Abram prayed to the God of his forefathers. 

Abram asked God for guidance. Seeing his humble spirit, God was pleased, and the Holy Spirit was sent to him. He was instructed to fulfill the wishes of his father, leave the land of his forefathers, and head south into Canaan. From there, God would show him the path. So Abram went, taking Sarai and Lot, along with all the people of his clan, and they drove their flocks and herds into Canaan. As they passed through the land of Shechem, the Holy Spirit again went to Abram. The Spirit told him that God was pleased he trusted the guidance given to him. And now, his tribe would become God's chosen people. From him, there would be hope for humanity's salvation. Then the Spirit told Abram God was blessing him and would ensure his clan was saved. So Abram did as his forefathers, he built a small altar of stone for burning incense and he praised God. From Abram many nations would be born in the land they now occupied. And, in time, his name would become a blessing, because through Abram humanity would be blessed. The future descendents of Abram then became the dedicated focus of the cultural development project.