Chapter 6:
The House of Israel 

6:1 Hebrews 
The transition from wealthy sons of Israel to Hebrews marked a critical sociological phase in the experiment. They were subjected to a reduction in social status that stripped away their pride and identity. The hostilities began under Seqenenra Taa who initiated the first major pushback against the Israelite elite, and continued under his successor Kamose, who launched campaigns to "Save Egypt" from the Semitic people. The total displacement of the Israelite ruling class was finalized by Ahmose I, who sacked Avaris and initiated a policy where the remaining Semitic people were resettled throughout Egypt. These actions led the formerly distinct tribal groups of Israel to merge into local clans. By the reigns of Seti I and Ramses II, the experimental group was mostly reduced to a marginalized labor class that identified as Hebrews. 

These descendants of Jacob were forced into royal construction programs, specifically tasked with building the supply cities of Pithom and Rameses under the oversight of ruthless taskmasters. This period functioned as a psychological crucible, forcing the subjects to abandon the individualistic trans-egalitarian competition of their forefathers to become a unified people rooted in the memory of a common history. Although painful, this phase ensured that the future nation would possess a sense of humility when they came to power. The memory of being oppressed would hopefully guide the Priestly Pillar toward establishing a system of governance that would protect the weak and apply a standard of justice fairly and equally to all. A synthesis required to represent a benevolent and just God.

6:2 The right conditions emerged for the Unity to begin the next stage of domestication for the branch of Jacob. The Protocol timed the emergence of the Israelite people to coincide with the simultaneous decline of Egyptian and Hittite control over the Levant. For generations, Canaan had served as a competitive buffer zone between the Egyptian Empire to the south and the Hittite Empire to the north. But now, Egyptian authority was crumbling into the hands of local chiefs and city-rulers, creating a rare window of regional instability. This power vacuum provided good land situated between major trade routes capable of hosting a new, independent society. The Israelites could move into abandoned cities and towns without the need for violent conquest, providing the physical space for the priestly nation to take root. 

The transition from the high-status sons of Israel to the marginalized Hebrews served as a social catalyst. This group could not simply be extracted during a time of peace; their extreme dissatisfaction with the status quo was a primary condition for the Protocol's success. Shared suffering fostered the intense communal loyalty and mutual aid necessary for unification. Without dissatisfaction, the people would have likely preferred to remain in an unpleasant Egypt rather than face the uncertainty of returning to their ancestral home. The Unity was aware of an illogical behavior present in significant portion of humanity; human minds tend to find comfort in what is known and would choose that comfort over the potential of the unknown. When geopolitical instability intersected with the psychological distress required for extraction, the search for a prophet began.

6:3 Israelites 
The few houses that could still trace their ancestry to one of the 12 patriarchs were the only descendants of Jacob that had not been reduced to laborers. They collectively referred to themselves as Israelites, although they were separated into clans based on the matriarchs. Previous generations had convinced the Pharoah to allow them to maintain their flocks and herds in exchange for providing the empire with the resources derived from them. They were afforded a level of freedom and social status above the Hebrews, but effectively functioned as vassal states within the land of Goshen. 

They became supervisors of their Hebrew kin, and because of this, their spirits were never humbled to the point of humility. They led projects, but they didn't lead their people, they lorded over them. They were better Princes than Prophets. The Hebrews were a product of their subjugation, more like cattle than man. They would most assuredly follow instruction, but lacked the comprehensive thought needed to build a nation. Both groups needed refinement and there wasn't a single candidate among them. 

6:4 Moses
The Prophet for this situation needed to be more than a mouthpiece for divine revelation, they would need to be capable of bringing a nation into existence. This person would need the qualities of all Four Pillars. Then one day a fortuitous circumstance presented itself. A Hebrew boy was adopted into the Egyptian royal family and raised as one of their own. He fled Egypt and married a daughter of the priest of Reuel. He was a descendant of Sarah living among the children of Hagar and Keturah. He was exposed to the methods of managing a nation, educated, and now living humbly in the wilderness. He could be the one to lead the house of Israel out of Egypt. This stage of the experiment required more intervention than would be typical for the Holy Spirit. So God decided to introduce itself directly by projecting itself into the created world. In a created form not dissimilar to its own, the modulating energy emanating from the dendritic structure called out, "Moses!".

6:5 The Exodus Experiment
The migration from Egypt to Canaan was designed as a trial run for The Four Pillars system. While moving through the wilderness, the Hebrews would operate as a migrating city-state. God presented Moses with the structure of the Four Pillars system, and the ideas that created it. It would then be up to them to create a society that would allow for the implementation of governance. They would need structure and rules before the Four Pillars could be applied, then they would need laws to maintain the society. They would need to be taught their purpose in the divine plan and have enough understanding to truly accept it. Then they would need to be tested.

The Divine Directive explicitly allowed people to choose the wrong path, so God would use the wilderness to refine the group. They would be given the opportunity to learn from their mistakes prior to permanent settlement. This would generate collective wisdom in an isolated environment rather than learning in the contested territories of the Levant. This period would serve as a sociological trial run. The Four Pillars would be formally integrated into the societal structure created by Moses. This would test the community's ability to manifest the Divine Plan.
