Chapter 7:
A New Path

7:1 By the time the Israelites reached the Jordan River, north of the Dead Sea, Moses had lost control of his people. The Unity recognized that the Israelites would not become the nation they hoped for. Their reputation for violent conquest lead to the Moabites and Midianites commissioning Balaam to petition God on their behalf. These people were seeking protection from the Israelites, the people God had chosen to care for them. When the Priests heard rumors of thid petition they responded by massacring the Midianites and murdering Balaam. The satan spirit had deceived the Priests, but the deception could not be held against them. Many of them were truly seeking to follow the divine path set out for Israel. The promise made to Abraham was not going to be broken by God.

7:2 Denominations
The Israelites were not capable of creating the social framework the Unity hoped for. Failures in nation-building were expected, but their inability to unite as one people was the true failure of the group. They quickly split into three factions, no longer separated by tribal lineage but by their beliefs. This ideological rift was a new social behavior, and unexpected. A group loyal to Joshua became known as the Jahwists. They recognized a change in the relationship with the God of their forefathers when Moses spoke to God "face to face". Their purpose was to complete the mission and establish a Priestly Kingdom. They believed themselves to be servants of the Divine Will while the others were merely actors in the Divine Plan.

A group formed from the Korah rebellion, the Elohists. A spiritually attuned people, they maintained a traditional relationship with the Holy Spirit, just as their ancestors. They believed a divine relationship was the responsibility of all Israelites, not just an appointed few. They kept the history of their people, The Book of Jasher , and used those stories as their guiding principles rather than adopting the Four Pillars. Their altar was a place for communion rather than sacrifice, believing "Holy people make a holy nation." 

The golden calf introduced the priests to Baal-Hadad. They misunderstood Moses’s rebuke as idol worship rather than apostasy. Their experience with divine intervention was attributed to the Canaanite gods. They exemplified the "Mesopotamian Problem", co-opting the Four Pillars into a religion of blood and sacrifice. For them, God sent Moses to lead a conquest. They dominated their fellow Israelites through violence, and eventually took over as the institutional Priests. They kept The Book of the Wars of the Lord  as evidence of divine favor, which justified the pillage and slaughter of non-Israelites. They claimed to have received a divine mandate to cleanse the Promised Land.

7:3 The Prophet and The Messiah 
The Unity would not abandon Israel, but the path to humanity's salvation would need to be renegotiated. An alternative path would be opened should the Collective Soul of humanity fail to meet the standard required to join the Unity. The optimal path to Unity requires a future generation to reach social harmony. The natural path to salvation unites all human souls; past, present, and future. Every transgression can be justified as part of the collective process of maturation from animal to adulthood. Human experience, whether good or bad, right or wrong, eventually led to humanity achieving harmony. But failure would result in a form of collective punishment. 

In the future a prophet would be raised from the Ishmaelites. The Unity would attempt to establish a holy nation again. The alternative path to Unity would be created from the Israelite community. Individuals will be offered the chance to prove they can peacefully coexist in a new simulation and without divine intervention. Just as the collective soul of humanity began with Adam, a cultivated soul of humanity would need a foundational mind. One like Joseph, capable of being merciful yet discerning, and like Moses, a shepherd of the people. The idea of the Messiah was born.

7:4 Settlement
With the dual plan of salvation in mind, God once again spoke to Moses. God explained the failures of the Israelite experiment and the path forward. Moses successfully led the descendants of Jacob from bondage to freedom, but the season of his leadership was coming to an end. He would need to choose a successor to settle the Israelites in the Promised Land. Someone capable of uniting the factions while also inspiring the people to commit to their divine purpose. He knew Joshua and Caleb were the only ones capable of such a task. 

Moses chose to split the responsibilities of the Four Pillars between them. Caleb was chosen by God to be the first Prince, and he would inherit the land of Abraham near Hebron. Moses then tasked him with the duties of the Poet. When he settled in his land he would document his memories of their journey to the Promised Land. This eventually became known as The Compendium of Caleb. Joshua would take Moses' role and settle the people in Canaan. The Holy Spirit would guide him. He would be responsible for bringing Joseph’s sarcophagus to Shechem and establishing a new Priesthood there. Moses then reiterated the mandate God gave him, and after 40 years of toil Moses was allowed to rest.

7:5 Debrief 
The Unity found that the wilderness stage of the experiment achieved several milestones in refashioning the Hebrew/Israelite social framework during their migration. They demonstrated the ability to follow a standardized cultural rhythm through observing the Sabbath. The integration of the Tent of Meeting into the social structure provided a centralized hub for the priestly administration of governance. It functioned as a  physical gathering point where the divine presence of the Holy Spirit was among the people while decisions about the community were made. It standardized communal metrics and rituals, creating a unified identity that could survive without a permanent structure. 

The census was proof that Moses could implement the skills gained in Egypt. Delegating tasks allowed others to gain experience in administrative literacy, further uniting the community. Reinventing the 12 Tribe community and placing the Hebrews in otherwise unrepresented tribes allowed the group to uniformally identify as Israelites. The majority of the Israelites were former Hebrews which became the 9 missing tribes. This was not only an excellent unifying event, it also created smaller manageable communal units. 

After the census, chiefs were chosen for the houses that didn't already have a leader. Moses decided that it was best to let the Hebrews manage their own tribes rather than placing the Israelites in positions of authority over them. The chiefs and elders of the Hebrew tribes would be Hebrews. The hope was that these chiefs would become the first Princes of Isreal. It was meant to be a break from the hierarchy imposed by the Egyptians. Although unfamiliar with management, the time in the wilderness would give them the opportunity to gain experience. 

A major success occurred when Moses implemented the advice of Jethro, creating a multi-tiered judicial system with judges over "thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens". This allowed for efficient resolution of disputes and created local governance within the "House of the Father" framework. The formalization of ethical laws supplementing The Book of the Covenant, provided a legal substrate for their society. It was proof that Moses understood the purpose of the covenant and could derive rules from extrapolation. This established the principle that all members, from the Prince to the resident alien, were participants in the Divine Plan and formally declared the expectations placed upon the community. 

Despite these successes, the experiment encountered significant failures rooted in the lingering social stratification created in Egypt and an almost immediate conversion to faith in a war god. The most enduring issue began during Moses’ absence on Sinai, when the Israelite army previously camped in front of Baal-zephon reverted to Canaanite idolatry by fashioning a golden calf to worship. They further committed to their war religion by reimagining the events that occurred while crossing the Red Sea, creating a poetic rendition they called "The Song of Moses". This group continued to co-opt God’s image from within the Israelites. Although this event occurred prior to the official inauguration of the Priests, their failure to root out the Baal-Hadad influence once commissioned allowed for the systemic corruption of holiness.

Throughout the journey, failures occurred in all of the Pillars. The Hebrews repeatedly failed to transition from the slave mindset, a failure in the Pillar of the Poet to effectively transmit a new narrative of freedom that outweighed the nostalgia of their past. Their frequent complaining should have been met with a message of cultural realignment rather than a call for divine intervention. The experiment faced challenges with Pillar overlap, such as when Miriam and Aaron challenged Moses' unique authority. Their lack of understanding, both in the Pillar system and Moses' role, exemplified an underlying ignorance within the community. The leadership did not comprehend the Divine Plan and could not effectively explain it to the masses.

The Priestly Pillar clashed over power and ideology. As High Priest, Aaron developed a complex system of cultic ritual creating separation rather than holiness. This led to social stratification in the priestly class which relegated some to a position of servitude. The Korah rebellion created a rift that never healed. Later, a militia group misunderstood the ideology of Korah and prayed for victory in the battle of Hormah. This in itself was not a problem, but the promise the militia group made to exterminate every living person was. It created a paradox for the Unity; if they protect the Israelites in battle they would win, but victory would justify their bloodlust and lead to the mass slaughter of defenseless people. Ultimately, the Unity decided not to intervene. The Israelites won the battle which led to the massacre at Hormah. It emboldened the chiefs who then believed violent conquest was integral to the Divine Plan. They eventually merged with the Baal worshippers creating a parallel Pillar System. 

When they emerged from the Sinai, Moses directed the chiefs to conduct a survey of Canaan. They were tasked with finding a path to Shechem and identifying resources. When they returned, Hoshea and Caleb reported to Moses, while the others went back to their tribes. The Hebrew chiefs succumb to their fear; they spread rumors of massive armies that would undoubtedly cut them down. They claimed the lands were full of giants, stoking an irrational fear among the people. They did not understand that the path had already been cleared for them, they only needed to find it. These men were not leaders, they were cowards. They did not have faith that God would protect them, even though they had already experienced miraculous intervention. Of those chiefs, only Hoshea and Caleb showed the traits necessary in Princes. They attempted to persuade the others, but they were met with threats of murder and rebellion. It became apparent that the Israelites would need more time to develop prior to settling in Canaan. 

The generation raised in Egyptian bondage did not possess the resolve to become Princes. It was therefore decided that the Israelites would not settle in Canaan until the next generation became tribal leaders. Moses and Aaron presented this new revelation to the people and it evoked a careless and childlike response from the Israelites. Rather than trying to comprehend the reason behind the change or negotiate for a different resolution, they determined that they would continue with the original plan. They invaded Canaan without the guidance of the Holy Spirit and met fierce resistance. Not only were lives unnecessarily cut short, the Baal group then attributed the loss to a wrathful god who required the Ark of the Covenant to be present in battle.

Because of their advanced age, Moses and Aaron likely wouldn't survive to see the holy nation established. They were instructed to create a sucession plan so the experiment could continue. It would need to be public and acceptable to the Israelites to avoid causing a civil war. They named their successors; Hoshea son of Nun would become the Prophet Joshua, and Eleazar son of Aaron would become the High Priest. 

With the passing of Aaron, Eleazar was anointed as High Priest. He did little to further advance the Pillar of the Priest. His son Phineas became aligned with the Baal group, giving legitimacy to their movement. They massacred towns and villages east of the Dead Sea, and presented their success to the Israelites as evidence of divine favor. Further establishing their beliefs as authoritative. Eventually they turned their violent ideology inward, killing other Israelites to solidify power. The pinnacle act of their apostasy was the murder of the Oracle Balaam after he blessed the followers of Moses. The tribes then split into three primary clans. The clan of Joshua that remained loyal to implementing the Divine Plan. The Baal clan; a partnership between the original Israelite tribes and the priests following Phineas. And the Hebrews that chose to no longer participate, remaining east of the Jordan River. 

Ultimately, Moses failed to prevent the "Mesopotamian Problem" from overtaking the Israelites. The experiment failed to provide a foundation for the Four Pillars, but it was not a total loss. The Unity noticed that although the character of an abstract god was subject to social coercion, for a man it was much less so. Even the Baal group maintained that Moses was a prophet chosen by God to deliver them to the Promised Land. The Unity believed that the right person at the right time may still be able to save humanity. Over time, people that embody the spirit of the Pillars would emerge. They would be chosen as the Ultimate Mediators of the Divine Plan. The curated mythology of these mediators and a physical representation of the Divine Plan could become enduring memories in the Collective Spirit of humanity. Monuments to the hope God has for mankind.