Chapter 8.1
Liberation
By: Caleb son of Jephunneh 

These are the names of the sons of Israel who came to Egypt with Jacob, each with his household: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin, Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher. The total number of people born to Jacob was seventy. (Joseph was already in Egypt.) Then Joseph died, and all his brothers, and that whole generation. But the Israelites were fruitful and prolific; they multiplied and grew exceedingly strong, so that the land was filled with them. Now a new king arose over Egypt who did not know Joseph. He said to his people, “Look, the Israelite people are more numerous and more powerful than we. Come, let us deal shrewdly with them, or they will increase and, in the event of war, join our enemies and fight against us and escape from the land.” 

Therefore they set taskmasters over them to oppress them with forced labor. They built supply cities, Pithom and Rameses, for Pharaoh. The Egyptians subjected the Israelites to hard servitude and made their lives bitter with hard servitude in mortar and bricks and in every kind of field labor. They were ruthless in all the tasks that they imposed on them. Then Pharaoh commanded all his people, “Every son that is born to the Hebrews you shall throw into the Nile, but you shall let every daughter live.” Now a man from the house of Levi went and married a Levite woman. The woman conceived and bore a son, and when she saw that he was a fine baby, she hid him three months. When she could hide him no longer she got a papyrus basket for him and plastered it with bitumen and pitch; she put the child in it and placed it among the reeds on the bank of the river. 

His sister stood at a distance, to see what would happen to him. The daughter of Pharaoh came down to bathe at the river, while her attendants walked beside the river. She saw the basket among the reeds and sent her maid to bring it. When she opened it, she saw the child. He was crying, and she took pity on him. “This must be one of the Hebrews’ children,” she said. Then his sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Shall I go and get you a nurse from the Hebrew women to nurse the child for you?” Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Yes.” So the girl went and called the child’s mother. Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Take this child and nurse it for me, and I will give you your wages.” So the woman took the child and nursed it. When the child grew up, she brought him to Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. She named him Moses, “because,” she said, “I drew him out of the water.”

One day after Moses had grown up, he went out to his people and saw their forced labor. He saw an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, one of his own people. He looked this way and that, and seeing no one he killed the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. When he went out the next day, he saw two Hebrews fighting, and he said to the one who was in the wrong, “Why do you strike your fellow Hebrew?” He answered, “Who made you a ruler and judge over us? Do you mean to kill me as you killed the Egyptian?” Then Moses was afraid and thought, “Surely the thing is known.” When Pharaoh heard of it, he sought to kill Moses. So Moses fled from Pharaoh. He settled in the land of Midian and sat down by a well. 

The priest of Midian had seven daughters. They came to draw water and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock. But some shepherds came and drove them away. Moses got up and came to their defense and watered their flock. When they returned to their father Reuel, he said, “How is it that you have come back so soon today?” They said, “An Egyptian helped us against the shepherds; he even drew water for us and watered the flock.” He said to his daughters, “Where is he? Why did you leave the man? Invite him to share a meal.” Moses agreed to stay with the man, and he gave Moses his daughter Zipporah in marriage. She bore a son, and he named him Gershom, for he said, “I have been an alien residing in a foreign land.”

Moses was keeping the flock of his father-in-law Jethro, the priest of Midian; he led his flock beyond the wilderness and came to Mount Horeb, the mountain of God. There the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire out of a bush; he looked, and the bush was blazing, yet it was not consumed. Then Moses said, “I must turn aside and look at this great sight and see why the bush is not burned up.” When the Lord saw that he had turned aside to see, God called to him out of the bush, “Moses, Moses!” And he said, “Here I am.” Then he said, “Come no closer! Remove the sandals from your feet, for the place on which you are standing is holy ground.” He said further, “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God. "The cry of the Hebrews has now come to me; I have also seen how the Egyptians oppress them." 

Then the Lord said, “I have observed the misery of my people who are in Egypt; I have heard their cry on account of their taskmasters. Indeed, I know their sufferings, and I have come down to deliver them from the Egyptians and to bring them up out of that land to a good and spacious land, to a land flowing with milk and honey. Go and assemble the elders of Israel and say to them, ‘The Lord, the God of your ancestors, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, has appeared to me, saying: I have given heed to you and to what has been done to you in Egypt.' They will listen to your voice, and you and the elders of Israel shall go to the king of Egypt and say to him, ‘The Lord, the God of the Hebrews, has met with us; let us now go a three days journey into the wilderness, so that we may celebrate a festival with our Lord in the wilderness.' ” 

Then Moses said to God, “If I come to the Hebrews and say to them, ‘The God of your ancestors has sent me to you,’ and they ask me, ‘What is his name?’ what shall I say to them?” God said to Moses, “I am who I am.” He said further, “Thus you shall say to the Hebrews, ‘I AM has sent me to you.’ ” Then Moses answered, “But look, they may not believe me or listen to me but say, ‘The Lord did not appear to you.’ ” The Lord said to him, “I will be with you. Now look at the ground.” and there was a snake, and Moses drew back from it. Then the Lord said to Moses, “Reach out your hand and seize it by the tail.” So he reached out his hand and grasped it, and it became a staff in his hand. 

Again, the Lord said to him, “Put your hand inside your cloak.” He put his hand into his cloak, and when he took it out, his hand was diseased, as white as snow. Then God said, “Put your hand back into your cloak”—so he put his hand back into his cloak, and when he took it out, it was restored like the rest of his body— “If they will not believe you or heed the first sign, they may believe the second sign. If they will not believe even these two signs or listen to you, you shall take some water from the Nile and pour it on the dry ground, and the water that you shall take from the Nile will become blood on the dry ground.”

But Moses said to God, “Who am I that I should go to Pharaoh and bring the Hebrews out of Egypt? O my Lord, I have never been eloquent, neither in the past nor even now that you have spoken to your servant, but I am slow of speech and slow of tongue.” Then the Lord said to him, “Who gives speech to mortals? Who makes them mute or deaf, seeing or blind? Is it not I, the Lord? Now go, and I will be with your mouth and teach you what you are to speak. I know, however, that the king of Egypt will not let you go except by a mighty hand. When Pharaoh does not listen to you, I will lay my hand upon Egypt and bring my people, company by company, out of the land of Egypt by great acts. The Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord when I stretch out my hand against Egypt and bring my people out from among them. Then you shall say to Pharaoh, ‘Thus says the Lord: Israel is my firstborn son. I said to you, “Let my son go that he may serve me.”

Moses said, “O my Lord, please send someone else.” Then the Lord said, “What of your brother Aaron, the Levite? I know that he can speak well, and when he sees you his heart will be glad. You shall speak to him and put the words in his mouth, and I will be with your mouth and with his mouth and will teach you what you shall do." The Lord then said to Aaron, “Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.” So he went, and he met him at the mountain of God and kissed him. Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord with which he had sent him and all the signs with which he had charged him. 

Moses went back to his father-in-law Jethro and said to him, “Please let me go back to my own people in Egypt and see whether they are still living.” And Jethro said to Moses, “Go in peace.” So Moses took his wife and his sons, put them on a donkey, and went back to the land of Egypt, and Moses carried the staff of God in his hand. On the way, at a place where they spent the night, the Holy Spirit came upon Moses and it looked as though he was going to die. But Zipporah took a flint and cut off her husband's foreskin and touched his feet with it. It was then that she said “a bridegroom of blood,” because of the circumcision. And the Lord said, "The blood shall be a sign for you on the houses where you live: when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and no plague shall destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt."

On the day when the Lord spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt, the Lord said to Moses, “Say therefore to the Hebrews: I am the Lord, and I will free you from the burdens of the Egyptians and deliver you from slavery to them. I will redeem you with an outstretched arm and with great acts. I will take you as my people, and I will be your God. You shall know that I am the Lord your God, who has freed you from the burdens of the Egyptians. I will bring you into the land that I swore to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; I will give it to you for a possession. I am the Lord.” Moses told this to the Hebrews, but they would not listen to Moses, because of their broken spirit and their cruel slavery.

Afterward Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and said, “Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel: Let my people go, so that they may celebrate a festival with me in the wilderness or I will fall upon you with pestilence.” But Pharaoh said, “Who is this Lord, that I should listen to him and let the Hebrews go? I do not know this God, and I will not let Israel go. Moses and Aaron, why are you taking the people away from their work? Get to your labors!” That same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people, as well as their supervisors, “You shall no longer give the people straw to make bricks, as before; let them go and gather straw for themselves. But you shall require of them the same quantity of bricks as they have made previously; do not diminish it, for they are lazy." 

So the people scattered throughout the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw. And the Israelite supervisors whom Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over them were beaten and were asked, “Why did you not finish the required quantity of bricks yesterday and today, as you did before?” Then the Israelite supervisors came to Pharaoh and cried, “Why do you treat your servants like this? No straw is given to your servants, yet they say to us, ‘Make bricks!’ Look how your servants are beaten! But the fault is with you.” He said, “You are lazy, lazy; that is why you say, ‘Let us go and worship the Lord.’ Go now and work, for no straw shall be given you, but you shall still deliver the same number of bricks.” The Israelite supervisors saw that they were in trouble when they were told, “You shall not lessen your daily number of bricks.” 

As they left Pharaoh, they came upon Moses and Aaron, who were waiting to meet them. They said to them, “The Lord look upon you and judge! You have brought us into bad odor with Pharaoh and his officials and have put a sword in their hand to kill us.” The Lord said to Moses, “Now you shall see what I will do to Pharaoh: indeed, by a mighty hand he will let them go; by a mighty hand he will drive them out of his land.” And he did so; God stretched out his hand and Moses took his staff and struck the dust of the earth, and gnats came on humans and animals alike; all the dust of the earth turned into gnats throughout the whole land of Egypt. The magicians tried to produce gnats by their secret arts, but they could not. There were gnats on both humans and animals. And the magicians said to Pharaoh, “This is the finger of God!” But Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not listen to them, just as the Lord had said. 

The Lord said to Moses in the land of Egypt, “This month shall mark for you the beginning of months; it shall be the first month of the year for you. Tell the whole congregation of Hebrews that on the evening of the tenth of this month they are to take a flint knife and circumcise the males of each household. The blood shall be a sign for you on the houses where you live: when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and no plague shall destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt. They shall take some of the blood and put it on the two doorposts and the lintel of their houses. And tell them, 'None of you shall go outside the door of your house until morning. You shall observe this as a perpetual ordinance for you and your male children. When you come to the land that the Lord will give you, as he has promised, you shall keep this observance. 

The whole congregation of Israel shall do this. If an alien who resides with you wants to celebrate the Passover of the Lord, all his males shall be circumcised; then he may draw near to celebrate it; he shall be regarded as a native of the land.' Then say to them, 'When your children ask you, What does this observance mean to you?’ you shall say, ‘It is the Passover, for the Lord passed over the houses of the Hebrews in Egypt when he struck Egypt with plagues but spared our houses.’ ” Aaron spoke all the words that the Lord had spoken to Moses and the people believed. When they heard that the Lord had given heed to the suffering of the Hebrews they bowed down and worshiped.

Then the Lord said to Moses, “Rise up early in the morning and present yourself before Pharaoh and say to him, ‘Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel: Let my people go. For this time I will send all my plagues upon you yourself, your officials, and your people, so that you may know that there is no one like me in all the earth. Indeed, by now I could have stretched out my hand and struck you and your people with pestilence, and you would have been cut off from the earth. But this is why I have let you live: to show you my power and to make my name resound through all the earth. You are still exalting yourself against my people by not letting them go. Tomorrow at this time I will cause the heaviest hail to fall that has ever fallen in Egypt from the day it was founded until now. Send, therefore, and have your livestock and everything that you have in the open field brought to a secure place; every human or animal that is in the open field and is not brought under shelter will die when the hail comes down upon them.’ ” 

Those officials of Pharaoh who feared the word of the Lord hurried their slaves and livestock off to a secure place, but those who did not regard the word of the Lord left their slaves and livestock in the open field. Then the Lord rained hail on the land of Egypt; there was hail with fire flashing continually in the midst of it, such heavy hail as had never fallen in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation. The hail struck down everything that was in the open field throughout all the land of Egypt, both human and animal; the hail also struck down all the plants of the field and shattered every tree in the field. Only in the land of Goshen, where the Israelites were, was there no hail. Then Moses and Aaron went and assembled all the elders of the Israelites. 

Aaron spoke all the words that the Lord had spoken to Moses and the people believed, and when they heard that the Lord had given heed to the Israelites they bowed down and worshiped. Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron and said to them, “This time I have sinned; the Lord is in the right, and I and my people are in the wrong. Pray to the Lord! Enough of God’s thunder and hail! I will let you go; you need stay no longer.” Moses said to him, “As soon as I have gone out of the city, I will stretch out my hands to the Lord; the thunder will cease, and there will be no more hail, so that you may know that the earth is the Lord’s. But as for you and your officials, I know that you do not yet fear the Lord God.” So Moses left Pharaoh, went out of the city, and stretched out his hands to the Lord; then the thunder and the hail ceased, and the rain no longer poured down on the earth. 

But when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunder had ceased, he sinned once more and hardened his heart, he and his officials. So the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he would not let the Israelites go, just as the Lord had spoken through Moses. Then the Lord said to Moses, “Rise early in the morning and present yourself before Pharaoh, as he goes out to the water, and say to him, ‘Thus says the Lord: Let my people go, because if you will not let my people go, I will send swarms of flies on you, your officials, and your people, and into your houses. The houses of the Egyptians shall be filled with swarms of flies, as will the land where they live. But on that day I will set apart the land of Goshen, where my people live, so that no swarms of flies shall be there, that you may know that I the Lord am in this land. Thus I will make a distinction between my people and your people. This sign shall appear tomorrow.’ " 

The Lord did so, and great swarms of flies came into the house of Pharaoh and into his officials’ houses; in all of Egypt the land was ruined because of the flies. Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron and said, “Go, worship your God within the land.” But Moses said, "We must go a three days’ journey into the wilderness as the Lord our God commands us.” So Pharaoh said, “I will let you go to worship the Lord your God in the wilderness, provided you do not go very far away. Pray for me.” Then Moses said, “As soon as I leave you, I will pray to the Lord that the swarms of flies may depart tomorrow from Pharaoh, from his officials, and from his people; only do not let Pharaoh again deal falsely by not letting the people go to worship the Lord.” 

So Moses went out from Pharaoh and prayed to the Lord. And the Lord did as Moses asked: he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his officials, and from his people; not one remained. But Pharaoh hardened his heart and would not let the people go. So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and said to him, “Thus says the Lord, the God of the Hebrews and the Israelites: 'How long will you refuse to humble yourself before me? Let my people go. For if you refuse to let my people go, tomorrow I will bring locusts into your country. They shall cover the surface of the land, so that no one will be able to see the land. They shall devour the last remnant left you after the hail, and they shall devour every tree of yours that grows in the field. They shall fill your houses and the houses of all your officials and of all the Egyptians—something that neither your parents nor your grandparents have seen, from the day they came on earth to this day.' ” 

Then they turned and went out from Pharaoh. Later Moses and Aaron were brought back to Pharaoh, and he said to them, “Go, serve the Lord your God! But which ones are to go?” Moses said, “We will go with our young and our old; we will go with our sons and daughters and with our flocks and herds, because we have the Lord’s festival to celebrate.” He said to them, “The Lord indeed will be with you, if ever I let your little ones go with you! Plainly, you have some evil purpose in mind. No, never! Your men may go and serve the Lord, for that is what you are asking.” And they were driven out from Pharaoh’s presence. 

Then the locusts came upon all the land of Egypt and settled on the whole country of Egypt, such a dense swarm of locusts as had never been before nor ever shall be again. They covered the surface of the whole land, so that the land was black, and they ate all the plants in the land and all the fruit of the trees that the hail had left. Nothing green was left on the trees or on the plants in the fields, in all the land of Egypt. Pharaoh hurriedly summoned Moses and Aaron and said, “I have sinned against the Lord your God and against you. Do forgive my sin this once, and pray to the Lord your God that at the least he remove this deadly thing from me.” So Moses went out from Pharaoh and prayed to the Lord. The Lord lifted the locusts and drove them into the Red Sea; not a single locust was left in all the country of Egypt. 

Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and said, “Go, serve the Lord. Only your flocks and your herds shall remain behind. Even your little ones may go with you.” But Moses said, “Our livestock also must go with us; not a hoof shall be left behind, for we must choose some of them to serve the Lord our God, and we will not know what to use until we arrive there.” But Pharaoh was unwilling to let them go. Then Pharaoh’s officials said to him, “How long shall this fellow be a snare to us? Send the people away, so that they may serve the Lord their God. Do you not yet understand that Egypt is ruined?” Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron in the night and said, “Rise up, go away from my people, both you and the Israelites! Go, serve the Lord, as you said. Take your flocks and your herds, as you said, and be gone. Get away from me! Take care that you do not see my face again, for on the day you see my face you shall die.” Moses said, “Just as you say! I will never see your face again.” 

That very day the Lord brought Israel out of the land of Egypt, company by company. The Egyptians urged the people to hasten their departure from the land, for they said, “We shall all be dead.” So the people took their dough before it was leavened, with their kneading bowls wrapped up in their cloaks on their shoulders. And Moses took with him the bones of Joseph, who had required a solemn oath of them, saying, “God will surely come to you, and then you must carry my bones with you from here.” That was for the Lord a night of vigil, to bring them out of the land of Egypt. The Hebrews journeyed from Rameses to Succoth. A mixed crowd of Israelites also went up with them and their livestock in great numbers, both flocks and herds. They baked unleavened cakes of the dough that they had brought out of Egypt; it was not leavened, because they were driven out of Egypt and could not wait, nor had they prepared any provisions for themselves.

Aaron said to the people, “Remember this day on which you came out of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, because the Lord brought you out from there by strength of hand; no leavened bread shall be eaten. When the Lord brings you into the land of Canaan, which he swore to your ancestors to give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, you shall keep this observance in this month. Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there shall be a festival to the Lord. You shall tell your child on that day, ‘It is because of what the Lord did for me when I came out of Egypt.’ It shall serve for you as a sign on your hand and as a reminder on your forehead, so that the teaching of the Lord may be on your lips, for with a strong hand the Lord brought you out of Egypt. You shall keep this ordinance at its proper time from year to year.

When Pharaoh let the people go, God did not lead them by way of the land of the Philistines, although that was nearer, for God thought, “If the people face war, they may change their minds and return to Egypt.” So God led the people by the roundabout way of the wilderness bordering the Red Sea. The Israelites went up out of the land of Egypt prepared for battle.They set out from Succoth and camped at Etham, on the edge of the wilderness. The Lord said to Moses, “Tell the Israelite army to turn back and camp in front of Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, in front of Baal-zephon. You shall take the rest of the camp in the opposite direction and go around the sea. Pharaoh will say of the Israelites, ‘They are wandering aimlessly in the land; the wilderness has closed in on them.’ "

When the king of Egypt was told that the people had fled, the minds of Pharaoh and his officials were changed toward the people, and they said, “What have we done, letting Israel leave our service?” So he had his chariot made ready and took his army with him; he took six hundred elite chariots and all the other chariots of Egypt with officers over all of them. Then Moses ordered the congregation to set out around the Red Sea to Marah, they could not drink the water of Marah because it was bitter. Then they went into the wilderness of Shur. But the people thirsted there for water, and the people complained against Moses and said, “Why did you bring us out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and livestock with thirst?” So Moses cried out to the Lord, “What shall I do for this people? They are almost ready to stone me.”  

There the Lord made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he put them to the test. He said, "Tell the congregation, 'If you will listen carefully to the voice of the Lord your God, and do what is right in his sight, he will not bring upon you any of the calamity that was brought upon the Egyptians, for he is the Lord who heals you.” Then they came to Elim, where there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees, and they camped there by the water. From Elim the congregation journeyed by stages, as the Lord commanded. They camped at Rephidim, then Amalek came and fought with Israel at Rephidim. Moses said to Joshua, “Choose some men for us and go out; fight with Amalek. Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the staff of God in my hand.” So Joshua did as Moses told him and fought with Amalek, while Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill. And Joshua defeated Amalek and his people with the sword. 

Across the Red Sea the Egyptians pursued them, all Pharaoh’s horses and chariots, his chariot drivers and his army; they nearly overtook the Israelite army camped by the sea, by Pi-hahiroth, in front of Baal-zephon. As Pharaoh drew near, the Israelites looked back, and there were the Egyptians advancing on them. In great fear the Israelites cried out to the Lord. The Angel of God who was going before the Israelite army moved and went behind them, and the pillar of cloud moved from in front of them and took its place behind them. It came between the army of Egypt and the army of Israel. And so the cloud was there with the darkness; one did not come near the other all night. Then the Lord drove the sea back and turned the sea into dry land, and the waters were divided. At the morning watch the Israelite army went into the sea on dry ground, the waters forming a wall for them on their right and on left.

In the light Moses could see the Israelite army approaching through the Red Sea, and the Egyptian army behind them. As Pharaoh drew near, the congregation with Moses looked back, and there were the Egyptians advancing on them. They said to Moses, “Was it because there were no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness? What have you done to us, bringing us out of Egypt? Is this not the very thing we told you in Egypt, ‘Let us alone so that we can serve the Egyptians’? For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.”  But Moses said to the people, “Do not be afraid, stand firm, and see the deliverance that the Lord will accomplish for you today, for the Egyptians whom you see today you shall never see again. The Lord will fight for you, and you have only to keep still.” 

The Lord looked down on the Egyptian army and threw the Egyptian army into a panic. He clogged their chariot wheels so that they turned with difficulty. The Egyptians said, “Let us flee from the Israelites, for the Lord is fighting for them against Egypt.” Then the Lord said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the sea, so that the water may come back upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots and chariot drivers.” Israel saw the great work that the Lord did against the Egyptians. So the people feared the Lord and believed in the Lord and in his servant Moses. Then the prophet Miriam, Aaron’s sister, took a tambourine in her hand, and all the women went out after her with tambourines and with dancing. And Miriam sang to them: “Sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; horse and rider he has thrown into the sea.”

Chapter 8.2
The Wilderness 
By: Caleb son of Jephunneh 

After the battle with Amalek, Moses had sent away his wife Zipporah, along with their two sons, and his father-in-law took her back. Then the whole congregation set out from Rephidim and came to the wilderness of Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after they had departed from the land of Egypt. Now Moses used to take the tent and pitch it outside the camp, far off from the camp; he called it the Tent of Meeting. And everyone who sought the Lord would go out to the Tent of Meeting, which was outside the camp. The whole congregation of the Israelites complained against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness. The Israelites said to them, “If only we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the pots of meat and ate our fill of bread, for you have brought us out into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly with hunger.” 

The Lord spoke to Moses, “I have heard the complaining of the Israelites; say to them, ‘In the morning you shall have your fill of bread; then you shall know that I am the Lord your God.’ " Then the Lord said to Moses, “I am going to rain bread from heaven for you, and each day the people shall go out and gather enough for that day. In that way I will test them, whether they will follow my instruction or not. On the sixth day, when they prepare what they bring in, it will be twice as much as they gather on other days.” 

Then Moses said to Aaron, “Say to the whole congregation of the Israelites: ‘Draw near to the Lord, for he has heard your complaining.’ ” And as Aaron spoke to the whole congregation of the Israelites, they looked toward the wilderness, and the glory of the Lord appeared. In the evening quails came up and covered the camp. Some of the people worked all that night gathering the quails; the least anyone gathered was ten homers, and they spread them out for themselves all around the camp. But while the meat was still between their teeth, before it was consumed, the anger of the Lord was kindled against the people. 

So the Lord said to Moses, “Gather for me the elders of Israel, whom you know to be the elders of the people and officers over them; bring them to the Tent of Meeting and have them take their place there with you. I will come down and speak with you there, and I will take some of the spirit that is on you and put it on them, and they shall bear the burden of the people along with you so that you will not bear it all by yourself." So Moses went out and told the people the words of the Lord, and he gathered the elders of the people and placed them all around the tent. 

Then the Lord came down and took some of the spirit that was on him and put it on the elders, and when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied. In the sight of the people the elders cried, "Consecrate yourselves for tomorrow you shall eat, for you have wailed in the hearing of the Lord, saying, 'If only we had bread to eat! Surely it was better for us in Egypt.' Therefore the Lord will give you bread, and you shall eat until it comes out of your nostrils and becomes loathsome to you—because you have rejected the blessing of Lord who is among you and killed the quail before him. A sickness will spread among the guilty, the ones who consumed flesh, and the Lord will not heal them of this plague.” That day the elders prophesied, but they did not do so again. So that place was called Kibroth-hattaavah, because there they buried the people who had the craving for flesh. 

In the morning there was a layer of dew around the camp. When the layer of dew lifted, there on the surface of the wilderness was a fine flaky substance, as fine as frost on the ground. When the Israelites saw it, they said to one another, “What is it?” For they did not know what it was. Moses said to them, “It is the bread that the Lord has given you to eat." The Israelites called it manna; it was like white coriander seed, and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey. Moses said to the congregation, "This is what the Lord has commanded: Gather as much of it as each of you needs, an omer per person according to the number of persons, all providing for those in their own tents.” 

Morning by morning they gathered it, as much as each needed, but when the sun grew hot, it melted. On the sixth day Moses gathered the elders and told them, “This is what the Lord has commanded: Tomorrow is a day of solemn rest, a holy Sabbath to the Lord; Six days you shall gather it, but on the seventh day, there will be none. Bake what you want to bake and boil what you want to boil, and all that is left over put aside to be kept until morning.” So they put it aside until morning, just as Moses commanded them, and it did not rot, and there were no maggots in it. On the seventh day all the leaders of the congregation came and told Moses, "Some of the people went out to gather, and they found none." And Moses said, "See! The Lord has given you the Sabbath; therefore on the sixth day he gives you food for two days; each of you stay where you are; do not leave your place on the seventh day.” So the people rested on the seventh day.

While they were traveling through the wilderness in Sinai, Miriam spoke against Moses to Aaron and said, “Has the Lord spoken only through Moses? Has he not spoken through us also?” And the Lord heard it. Now the man Moses was very humble, more so than anyone else on the face of the earth. Suddenly the Lord said to Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, “Come out, you three, to the Tent of Meeting.” So the three of them came out. And he said, “Hear my words: When there are prophets among you, I the Lord make myself known to them in visions; I speak to them in dreams. Not so with my servant Moses; he is faithful in all my house. With him I speak face to face—clearly, not in riddles, and he beholds the form of the Lord. Why then were you not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?” 

And Aaron turned toward Miriam and saw that Miriam’s skin had become diseased, and was white as snow. Then Aaron said, “Oh, my lord, do not punish her for a sin that she has so foolishly committed." And Moses cried to the Lord, saying, “O God, please heal her.” But the Lord said to Moses, “Miriam defiled herself by speaking against you, therefore she spoke against me. Her heart is corrupted by the wicked spirit and there is illness in her soul. The corruption of her flesh bears the truth, she is unclean. She must repent. Let her be shut out of the camp for seven days, and after that she may be brought in again. But let the Israelites keep the Passover at its appointed time." And Miriam was shut out of the camp.

So Moses told the Israelites that they should keep the Passover. Now there were certain people who knew Miriam was unclean, and could not keep the Passover on that day. They came before Moses and said to him, “If we are unclean and repent, why must we be kept from presenting the Lord’s offering at its appointed time among the Israelites?” Moses said to them, “Wait, so that I may hear what the Lord will command concerning your query.” The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, “Speak to the Israelites, saying: Anyone of you or your descendants who is unclean and repents shall still keep the Passover to the Lord." So they kept the Passover in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at twilight, in the wilderness of Sinai. Just as the Lord had commanded Moses, so the Israelites did. The people did not set out on the march until Miriam had been brought in again. 

Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses’s father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses and for his people Israel, how the Lord had brought Israel out of Egypt. He sent word to Moses, “I, your father-in-law Jethro, am coming to you, with your wife and your two sons.” So Moses went out to meet his father-in-law; he bowed down and kissed him; each asked after the other’s welfare, and they went into the tent. Then Moses told his father-in-law all that the Lord had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel’s sake, all the hardship that had found them on the way, and how the Lord had delivered them. Jethro rejoiced for all the good that the Lord had done to Israel, in delivering them from the Egyptians. Jethro said, “Blessed be the Lord, who has delivered you from the Egyptians and from Pharaoh. Now I know that the Lord is greater than all gods, because he delivered the people from the Egyptians, when they dealt arrogantly with them.” 

The next day Moses sat as judge for the people, while the people stood around him from morning until evening. When Moses’s father-in-law saw all that he was doing for the people, he said, “What is this that you are doing for the people? Why do you sit alone, while all the people stand around you from morning until evening?” Moses said to his father-in-law, “Because the people come to me to inquire of God. When they have a dispute, they come to me, and I decide between one person and another, and I make known to them the statutes and instructions of God.” 

Moses’s father-in-law said to him, “What you are doing is not good. You will surely wear yourself out, both you and these people with you, for the task is too heavy for you; you cannot do it alone. Now listen to me. I will give you counsel, and God be with you! You should represent the people before God and bring their cases to God. Teach them the statutes and instructions and make known to them the way they are to go and the things they are to do. You should also look for able men among all the people, men who fear God, are trustworthy, and hate dishonest gain; set them as officers over thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens. Let them sit as judges for the people at all times; let them bring every important case to you but decide every minor case themselves. So it will be easier for you, and they will bear the burden with you. If you do this and God so commands you, then you will be able to endure, and all these people will go to their homes in peace.” So Moses listened to his father-in-law and prayed for guidance.

The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the Tent of Meeting, on the first day of the second month, in the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt, saying, “Take a census of the whole congregation of Israel." So Moses and Aaron went to the tribal leaders they knew by name, to assist them. And on that day they brought the whole congregation together. They assembled themselves in clans or by their ancestral houses. The divisions of the Israelites were; Levi, Judah, Ephraim and Manasseh. These were the ones chosen from the congregation, the leaders of their ancestral tribes, the heads of the divisions of Israel. The Hebrews were assembled in clans, some formed in Egypt and others on the journey. They were the generations of second sons and daughters of the ancestral houses. So they took a census of the Hebrews by their tents, and the Israelites by their ancestral houses, and enrolled all of Israel. 

Those enrolled of the tribe of Reuben were five hundred. Those enrolled of the tribe of Simeon were three hundred. Those enrolled of the tribe of Gad were six hundred fifty. Those enrolled of the tribe of Judah were six hundred. Those enrolled of the tribe of Issachar were four hundred. Those enrolled of the tribe of Zebulun were four hundred. Those enrolled of the tribe of Ephraim were five hundred. Those enrolled of the tribe of Manasseh were two hundred. Those enrolled of the tribe of Benjamin were four hundred. Those enrolled of the tribe of Dan were seven hundred. Those enrolled of the tribe of Asher were five hundred. Those enrolled of the tribe of Naphtali were four hundred. All the tents and houses numbered three thousand five hundred fifty. 

The Levites, however, were not numbered by their ancestral tribe along with them. The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, “Only the tribe of Levi you shall not enroll, and you shall not take a census of them with the others. Speak to the Hebrews and say to them: When either men or women make a special vow, the vow of a Nazirite, to separate themselves, all their days as nazirites they are holy to the Lord. The Nazirites shall be consecrated at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting. They shall shave their head and take the hair from the consecrated head and put it on the fire under the sacrifice of well-being. Then the priest shall elevate them as an elevation offering before the Lord; they are a holy portion for the priest. After that the Nazirites may be counted among the Levites." 

Moses chose able men from the Hebrews and appointed them as heads over the people, as judges over hundreds and tens, and they were named for the nine missing clans. These were their names: for the tribe of Reuben, Shammua son of Zaccur; for the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat son of Hori; for the tribe of Issachar, Igal son of Joseph; for the tribe of Benjamin, Palti son of Raphu; for the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel son of Sodi; for the tribe of Dan, Ammiel son of Gemalli; for the tribe of Asher, Sethur son of Michael; for the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi son of Vophsi; for the tribe of Gad, Geuel son of Machi. And of the Israelites Moses chose from the tribe of Judah, Caleb son of Jephunneh; from the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea son of Nun; from the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi son of Susi. And they judged the people at all times; hard cases they brought to Moses, but any minor case they decided themselves. Now the whole congregation knew themselves as Israelites. Then Moses let his father-in-law depart, and he went off to his own country.

The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, after they had come out of the land of Egypt, saying, "Do not camp in the wilderness, bring them to me at Horeb." So Israel camped there in front of the mountain. In the morning Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet God. They took their stand at the foot of the mountain. The glory of the Lord settled on Mount Horeb, the appearance of the glory of the Lord was like a devouring fire on the top of the mountain in the sight of the Israelites. Moses said to the people, “Do not be afraid, for God has come only to test you and to put the fear of him upon you so that you do not sin.” Then God called out to Moses from the clouds. 

So Moses set out with his assistant Hoshea, and Moses went up onto the mountain of God. The Lord called to him from the mountain, “Thus you shall say to the house of Jacob and tell the Israelites: ‘You have seen what I did to the Egyptians and how I bore you on eagles’ wings and brought you to myself. Now, therefore, if you obey my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be my treasured possession out of all the peoples. Indeed, the whole earth is mine, but you shall be for me a priestly kingdom and a holy nation.’ " 

The Covenant of Israel 
Then the Lord said to Moses, “Thus you shall say to the Israelites: You have seen for yourselves how I spoke with you from heaven. In every place where I cause my name to be remembered I will come to you and bless you. You shall not make gods of silver alongside me, nor shall you make for yourselves gods of gold. You need make for me only an altar of earth and sacrifice on it your burnt offerings and your offerings of well-being, your sheep and your oxen. If anyone of the house of Israel slaughters an ox or a lamb or a goat in the camp or slaughters it outside the camp and does not bring it to the entrance of the tent of meeting, to present it as an offering before the Lord, he shall be held guilty of bloodshed; he has shed blood, and he shall be cut off from the people. If anyone of the house of Israel or of the aliens who reside among them eats any blood, I will set my face against that person who eats blood and will cut that person off from the people. You shall not make wrongful use of the name of the Lord your God, for the Lord will not acquit anyone who misuses his name. Remember the Sabbath day and keep it holy. Six days you shall labor and do all your work. But the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God; you shall not do any work. Six years you shall sow your land and gather in its yield, but the seventh year you shall let it rest and lie fallow so that the poor of your people may eat, and what they leave the wild animals may eat. You shall do the same with your vineyard and with your olive orchard. Three times in the year you shall hold a festival for me. You shall observe the Festival of Unleavened Bread; as I commanded you, you shall eat unleavened bread for seven days at the appointed time in the month of Abib, for in it you came out of Egypt. Keep the Passover at its appointed time. In the second month on the fourteenth day, at twilight, they shall keep it; they shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. They shall leave none of it until morning nor break a bone of it; according to all the statute for the Passover they shall keep it. In the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, atonement shall be made for you, to cleanse you; from all your sins you shall be clean before the Lord. This shall be an everlasting statute for you, to make atonement for the Israelites once in the year for all their sins. You shall humble yourselves and shall do no work, neither the native-born nor the alien who resides among you.You shall not wrong or oppress a resident alien, for you were aliens in the land of Egypt. You shall not abuse any widow or orphan. If you do abuse them, when they cry out to me, I will surely heed their cry. You shall not follow a majority in wrongdoing. You shall not join hands with the wicked to act malicious. You shall not pervert the justice due to your poor in their lawsuits. You shall take no bribe, for a bribe blinds officials and subverts the cause of those who are in the right. Keep far from a false charge, and do not kill the innocent and those in the right, for I will not acquit the guilty. I am going to send an angel in front of you, to guard you on the way and to bring you to the place that I have prepared. Be attentive to him and listen to his voice; do not rebel against him, for he will not pardon your transgression, for my name is in him."

Moses wrote down all the words of the Lord. He rose early in the morning, built an altar at the foot of the mountain, and set up twelve pillars, corresponding to the twelve tribes of Israel. Then he took the Book of the Covenant and read it in the hearing of the people, and they said, “All that the Lord has spoken we will do, and we will be obedient.” 

When Moses had told the words of the people to the Lord, the Lord said to Moses, "Thus you shall do to Aaron and to his sons, just as I have commanded you; through seven days you shall ordain them. I have called by name Bezalel son of Uri son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, and I have filled him with a divine spirit, with ability, intelligence, and knowledge, and every kind of skill, to devise artistic designs, to work in silver and bronze, and in carving wood. Moreover, I have appointed with him Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, and I have given skill to them, so that they may make all that I will command you. Go and consecrate them today, have them wash their clothes and prepare. On the third day the Lord will come down and ordain the priests in the sight of all the people. You shall make an altar on which to offer incense; you shall make it of acacia wood. Make two silver trumpets; you shall make them of hammered work, and you shall use them for summoning the congregation and for breaking camp. When both are blown, the whole congregation shall assemble before you at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting. I will consecrate the Tent of Meeting and the altar; Aaron also and his sons I will consecrate to serve me as priests. I will dwell among the Israelites, and I will be their God. And they shall know that I am the Lord their God, who brought them out of the land of Egypt that I might dwell among them; I am the Lord their God. Now this is what you shall do to them to consecrate them to serve me as priests. You shall make a bronze basin with a bronze stand for washing. You shall put it in the Tent of Meeting before the altar, and you shall put water in it; with the water Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet. When they go into the Tent of Meeting or when they come near the altar to minister to make an offering by fire to the Lord, they shall wash with water. You shall make sacred anointing oil blended as by the perfumer; it shall be a holy anointing oil. You shall make unleavened bread, unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil. You shall make them of choice wheat flour. You shall put them in one basket and bring them to the Tent of Meeting. On the third day you shall bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting and wash them with water. On the fourth day you shall take the holy anointing oil and pour it on their heads and anoint them. On the fifth day you shall take the vestments and put on Aaron the robe of Joseph. On the sixth day, from the basket of unleavened bread that is before the Lord, you shall place the unleavened cakes on the palms of Aaron and the wafers on the palms of his sons and raise them as an elevation offering before the Lord. On the seventh day you shall take the cakes and wafers from their hands and turn them into smoke on the altar of incense. It is an offering by fire to the Lord. You shall bring the Levites before the tent of meeting and assemble the whole congregation of the Israelites. Take the Levites from among the Israelites and cleanse them. Thus you shall do to them, to cleanse them: sprinkle the water of purification on them; have them shave their whole body with a razor and wash their clothes and so cleanse themselves. Then you shall have the Levites stand before Aaron and his sons, and you shall present them as an elevation offering to the Lord. Thus you shall separate the Levites from among the other Israelites, and the Levites shall be mine. Thereafter the Levites may go in to do service at the Tent of Meeting, once you have cleansed them and presented them as an elevation offering. For they are unreservedly given to me from among the Israelites; I have taken them for myself, that they may do the service of the Lord. This applies to the Levites: from twenty-five years old and up they shall begin to do duty in the service of the Tent of Meeting; and from the age of fifty years they shall retire from the duty of the service and serve no more." 

As the Lord had commanded Moses concerning the Priests and Levites, so he did with them. Thereafter the Levites went in to do their service in the Tent of Meeting in attendance on Aaron and his sons. Then he said to Moses, “Come up to the Lord, you and Aaron, Hoshea and Hur, and the elders of Israel, and worship at a distance. You alone shall come near the Lord, but the others shall not come near.” Moses went up on the mountain and entered the clouds. Moses was on the mountain for forty days and forty nights. When the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the mountain, the people gathered around the sons of Aaron and said to them, “Come, make gods for us, who shall go before us; as for this Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.” Nadab said to them, “Take off the gold rings that are on the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters and bring them to me.” 

So all the people took off the gold rings from their ears and brought them to Nadab. He took these from them, formed them in a mold, and cast an image of a calf, and they said, “These are your gods, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt!” When Abihu saw this, he built an altar before it, and Nadab made a proclamation and said, “Tomorrow shall be a festival to the Lord.” They rose early the next day and offered burnt offerings and brought sacrifices of well-being, and the people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to revel. The Lord said to Moses, “Go down at once! Your people, whom you brought up out of the land of Egypt, have acted perversely; they have been quick to turn aside from the way that I commanded them; they have cast for themselves an image of a calf and have worshiped it and sacrificed to it and said, ‘These are your gods, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt!’ ” 

Then Moses turned and went down from the mountain. When Hoshea heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said to Moses, “There is a noise of war in the camp.” But he said, “It is not the sound made by victors or the sound made by losers; it is the sound of singing that I hear.” As soon as he came near the camp and saw the calf and the dancing, Moses’s anger burned hot, and he took the calf that they had made and threw it at the foot of the mountain. He burned it with fire, ground it to powder, scattered it on the water, and made Nadab and Abihu drink it. Then Moses stood at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting and said, “Who is on the Lord’s side? Come to me!” And those who took the vow of the nazirite gathered around him. Moses said, “Today you have been ordained for the service of the Lord, and so have brought a blessing on yourselves this day.” 

On the next day Moses said to the people, “You have sinned a great sin. But now I will go up to the Lord; perhaps I can make atonement for your sin.” So Moses returned to the Lord and said, “Alas, this people has sinned a great sin; they have made for themselves gods of gold. But now, if you will only forgive their sin—but if not, please blot me out of the book that you have written. See, you have said to me, ‘Bring up this people,’ but you have not let me know whom you will send with me. Yet you have said, ‘I know you by name, and you have also found favor in my sight.’ Now if I have found favor in your sight, please show me your ways, so that I may know you and find favor in your sight. Consider, too, that this nation is your people.” 

The Lord said to Moses, “I will also do this thing that you have asked, for you have found favor in my sight, and I know you by name. Write these words, for in accordance with these words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel.” He was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights; he neither ate bread nor drank water. And he wrote The Law on stone tablets. Moses came down from Mount Horeb. As he came down from the mountain with the two tablets of The Law in his hand, Moses did not know that the skin of his face shone because he had been talking with God. When Aaron and all the Israelites saw Moses, the skin of his face was shining, and they were afraid to come near him. 

Moses said to them, “Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel: 'I have seen this people, how stiff-necked they are. Whoever has sinned against me I will blot out of my book. But now go, lead the people to the place about which I have spoken to you. Nevertheless, when the day for punishment comes, I will punish them for their sin. Go up to a land flowing with milk and honey, my angel shall go in front of you, but I will not go up among you.' ” When the people heard these harsh words, they mourned, and no one put on ornaments. Therefore the Israelites stripped themselves of their ornaments, from Mount Horeb onward. 

When Moses had finished speaking with them, he put a veil on his face. Then the Angel of the Lord passed before them and proclaimed, “The Lord, the Lord, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness, keeping steadfast love for the thousandth generation, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, yet by no means clearing the guilty. You shall not make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, for I will cast out nations before you and enlarge your borders; no one shall covet your land when you go up to appear before the Lord your God three times in the year." And Moses quickly bowed down to the ground and worshiped.

Chapter 8.3
The King’s Road
By: Caleb son of Jephunneh 

In the second year, in the second month, on the twentieth day of the month, the Israelites set out by stages from the wilderness of Sinai. So we set out from the mount of the Lord three days’ journey with the Angel of the Lord going before us at the command of the Lord. At the command of the Lord we would camp, and at the command of the Lord we would set out. We went into the wilderness of Paran to seek out a resting place.

Then Moses sent messengers from Paran to the king of Edom, “Thus says your brother Israel: You know all the adversity that has befallen us, how our ancestors went down to Egypt, and we lived in Egypt a long time, and the Egyptians oppressed us and our ancestors, and when we cried to the Lord, he heard our voice and brought us out of Egypt, and here we are in Korah, a town on the edge of your territory. Now let us pass through your land. We will not pass through field or vineyard or drink water from any well; we will go along the King’s Road, not turning aside to the right hand or to the left until we have passed through your territory.” But Edom said to him, “You shall not pass through, or we will come out with the sword against you.” 

The Israelites said to him, “We will stay on the King’s Road, and if we drink of your water, we and our livestock, then we will pay for it. It is only a small matter; just let us pass through on foot.” But he said, “You shall not pass through.” And Edom came out against them with a large force, heavily armed. Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through their territory, so Israel turned away from them. Now there was no water for the congregation, so the people quarreled with Moses and said, “Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to bring us to this wretched place? It is no place for grain or figs or vines or pomegranates, and there is no water to drink.” 

Aaron gathered the assembly together, and he said to them, “Listen, you rebels; shall we bring water for you out of this rock?” Then all the congregation raised a loud cry, and the people wept that night. They said to one another, “Let us choose a captain and go back to Egypt.” So the leaders of Israel, heads of their ancestral houses, the leaders of the tribes, went out in search of water. Then the leaders found a well and water came out abundantly, and the congregation and their livestock drank. Then Israel sang this song: “Spring up, O well!—Sing to it!—the well that the leaders sank, that the nobles of the people dug, with the scepter, with the staff.” But the Lord said to Aaron, “Because you did not trust in me, to show my holiness before the eyes of the Israelites, therefore you shall not bring this assembly into the land that I have given them.” 

Now in Korah, Izhar son of Kohath son of Levi, along with Nadab and Abihu sons of Aaron, and Nashon son of Amminadab, took two hundred fifty Israelite men, leaders of the congregation, chosen from the assembly, well-known men, and they confronted Aaron. They assembled against him and said, “You have gone too far! All the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them. So why then do you exalt yourself above the assembly of the Lord?” When Moses heard it, he fell on his face. The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, “Speak to the Israelites, and get twelve staffs from them, one for each ancestral house, from all the leaders of their ancestral houses. Write each man’s name on his staff, and write Aaron’s name on the staff of Levi. For there shall be one staff for the head of each ancestral house. Place them in the Tent of Meeting before the Book of the Covenant, where I meet with you. And the staff of the man whom I choose shall sprout; thus they will know I have chosen Aaron and will put a stop to the complaints they make against you.” 

Moses spoke to the Israelites saying, “In the morning the Lord will make known who is his; the one whom he will choose he will allow to speak for him." And all their leaders gave him staffs, one for each leader, according to their ancestral houses, twelve staffs; and the staff of Aaron was among theirs. So Moses placed the staffs before the Lord in the Tent of Meeting. When Moses went into the tent the next day, the staff of Aaron for the house of Levi had sprouted. It put forth buds, produced blossoms, and bore ripe almonds. Then Moses brought out all the staffs from before the Lord to all the Israelites, and they looked, and each man took his staff. 

Now Aaron’s sons Nadab and Abihu each took his censer, put fire in it, and laid incense on it, and they offered unholy fire before the Lord, such as he had not commanded them. And the Lord spoke to Moses: “Speak to the congregation, saying: Get away from the dwellings of Nadab and Abihu.” So Moses got up and went to Nadab and Abihu; the elders of Israel followed him. He spoke to the congregation, saying, “Turn away from the tents of these wicked men and touch nothing of theirs, or you will be swept away for all their sins.” And fire came out from the censers of the Lord and consumed some outlying parts of the camp. So that place was called Taberah, because the fire of the Lord burned against them. Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, “Tell Eleazar son of Aaron the priest to take the censers out of the blaze, then scatter the fire far and wide. Make them into hammered plates as a covering for the altar, for they presented them before the Lord and they became holy. Thus they shall be a sign to the Israelites.” So Eleazar the priest took the bronze censers that had been presented by those who rebelled, and they were hammered out as a covering for the altar.

On the next day, however, the whole congregation of the Israelites rebelled against Moses and against Aaron, saying, “You have sinned against the people of the Lord.” Moses sent for Nashon and the tribe of Judah, but they said, “We will not come! Is it too little that you have brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey to kill us in the wilderness, that you must also lord it over us? It is clear you have not brought us into a land flowing with milk and honey or given us an inheritance of fields and vineyards. Would you put out the eyes of these men? We will not come!” And they remained cut off from Israel.

Then Nashon spoke to all his congregation saying, “This is a statute of the law that the Lord has commanded: Tell the Israelites to bring you a red heifer without defect, in which there is no blemish and on which no yoke has been laid. You shall give it to the priest, and it shall be taken outside the camp and slaughtered. The priest shall take some of its blood with his finger and sprinkle it seven times toward the front of the Tent of Meeting. Then the heifer shall be burned in his sight; its skin, its flesh, and its blood, with its entrails, shall be burned. The priest shall take cedarwood, hyssop, and crimson material and throw them into the fire in which the heifer is burning. Then the priest shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water, and afterward he may come into the camp, but the priest shall remain unclean until evening. The one who burns the heifer shall wash his clothes in water and bathe his body in water; he shall remain unclean until evening. Then someone who is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer and deposit them outside the camp in a clean place, and they shall be kept for the congregation of the Israelites for the water for cleansing." 

Moses was very angry and said to the Lord, “Pay no attention to their offering. I have not taken one donkey from them, and I have not harmed any one of them.” Then Moses said to Izhar, “Hear now, you Levites! Is it too little for you that the God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel to allow you to approach him in order to perform the duties of the Lord and to stand before the congregation and serve them? He has allowed you to approach him, and all your brother Levites with you, yet you seek the priesthood as well! Therefore you and all your congregation have gathered together against the Lord." Then the Lord spoke to Moses saying, “Separate yourselves from this congregation.” 

Moses said to Aaron, “Take your censer, put fire on it from the altar and lay incense on it and carry it quickly to the congregation and make atonement for them. For wrath has gone out from the Lord.” So Aaron took it as Moses had ordered and ran into the middle of the assembly. He put on the incense and made atonement for the people. Then Moses said to Israel, “This is how you shall know that the Lord has sent me to do all these works; it has not been of my own accord." And when the congregation had assembled at the Tent of Meeting, the glory of the Lord appeared. 

Then the Israelites said to Moses, “We are perishing; we are lost; all of us are lost! Are we all to perish?” Moses took water from the bronze basin and dashed it on the people saying, "As the Lord has said 'When they come near the Tent of Meeting make an offering by fire to the Lord, they shall wash with water, so that they may not die.' These are the waters of Meribah, here the Israelites quarreled with the Lord and through which he showed himself to be holy."

The Israelites, the whole congregation, came into the wilderness of Zin in the first month, and we stayed in Kadesh. Miriam died and was buried there. The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, “Send men to survey the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the Israelites; from each of the ancestral tribes you shall send a man, every one a leader among them.” So Moses sent us from the wilderness of Zin, according to the command of the Lord. 

These were our names: from the tribe of Reuben, Shammua son of Zaccur; from the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat son of Hori; from the tribe of Judah, Caleb son of Jephunneh;  from the tribe of Issachar, Igal son of Joseph; from the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea son of Nun; from the tribe of Benjamin, Palti son of Raphu; from the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel son of Sodi; from the tribe of Joseph (that is, from the tribe of Manasseh), Gaddi son of Susi; from the tribe of Dan, Ammiel son of Gemalli;  from the tribe of Asher, Sethur son of Michael; from the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi son of Vophsi; from the tribe of Gad, Geuel son of Machi. 

These were the names of the men whom Moses sent to survey the land. That day Moses changed the name of Hoshea son of Nun to Joshua. When Moses sent us to survey the land of Canaan he said, “Go up there into the Negeb, and go up into the hill country, and see what the land is like and whether the people who live in it are strong or weak, whether they are few or many, and whether the land they live in is good or bad, and whether the towns that they live in are unwalled or fortified, and whether the land is rich or poor, and whether there are trees in it or not. Be bold, and bring some of the fruit of the land.” 

So we went up and surveyed the land from the wilderness of Zin to Rehob, near Lebo-hamath. We went up into the Negeb and came to Hebron, and Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the Anakites, were there. (Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.) Now it was the season of the first ripe grapes. And when we came to the Wadi Eshcol we cut down from there a branch with a single cluster of grapes, and Joshua and I carried it on a pole between us. The others also brought some pomegranates and figs. That place was called the Wadi Eshcol because of the cluster cut down from there.

At the end of forty days we returned from surveying the land. And we came to Moses and Aaron and to all the congregation of the Israelites in the wilderness of Zin, at Kadesh. We brought back word to them and to all the congregation and showed them the fruit of the land. I reported to them and said, “We came from the land to which you sent us; it flows with milk and honey, and this is its fruit. The Amalekites live in the land of the Negeb; the Hittites, the Jebusites, and the Amorites live in the hill country, and the Canaanites live by the sea and along the Jordan. Let us go up at once and occupy it, for we are well able to overcome it.”

Then the men who had gone up with us said, “We are not able to go up against this people, for they are stronger than we. The land that we have gone through as spies is a land that devours its inhabitants, and all the people that we saw in it are of great size. There we saw the Nephilim, and to ourselves we seemed like grasshoppers, and so we seemed to them.” And all the Israelites complained against Moses and Aaron; the whole congregation said to them, “Why is the Lord bringing us into this land to fall by the sword? Our wives and our little ones will become plunder; would it not be better for us to go back to Egypt?” 

Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of the congregation of the Israelites. And Joshua son of Nun and I, who were among those who had surveyed the land, tore our clothes and said to all the congregation of the Israelites, “The land that we went through is an exceedingly good land. If the Lord is pleased with us, he will bring us into this land and give it to us, a land that flows with milk and honey. Only, do not rebel against the Lord, and do not fear the people of the land, for they are no more than bread for us; their protection is removed from them, and the Lord is with us; do not fear them.” But the whole congregation threatened to stone us.

Then the Angel of the Lord appeared at the Tent of Meeting to all the Israelites. And the Lord said to Moses, “How long will this people despise me? And how long will they refuse to believe in me, in spite of all the signs in Egypt and in the wilderness? These people who have seen the glory of the Lord, and yet have tested me and have not obeyed my voice. They shall not see the land sworn to their ancestors; none of those who despised me shall see it. But my servant Caleb, because he has a different spirit and has followed me wholeheartedly, I will bring into the land into which he went, and his descendants shall possess it. Now, since they fear the Amalekites and the Canaanites that live in the valleys, turn tomorrow and set out for the Dead Sea by way of the wilderness.”

When the king of Arad, who lived in the Negeb, heard that Israel was coming by the way of Atharim, he fought against us and took some from the tribe of Judah captive. Then Judah made a vow to the Lord and said, “If you will indeed give this people into our hands, then we will utterly destroy them and their towns.” By the sword they utterly destroyed them and their towns; so the place was called Hormah.

When some of the Israelites heard of Judah's prayer, they mourned greatly. They rose early in the morning and went up to the heights of the hill country, saying, “Here we are. We will go up to the place that the Lord has promised, for we have sinned.” But Moses said, “Why do you continue to transgress the command of the Lord? That will not succeed. Do not go up, for the Lord is not with you; do not let yourselves be struck down before your enemies. For the Amalekites and the Canaanites will confront you there, and you shall fall by the sword; because you have turned back from following the Lord, the Lord will not be with you.” But they presumed to go up to the heights of the hill country, even though Moses warned against it. 

Then the Amalekites and the Canaanites who lived in that hill country came down and defeated them, pursuing them as far as Hormah. Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron at Mount Hor, on the border of the land of Edom, “Let Aaron be gathered to his people. For he shall not enter the land that I have given to the Israelites, because he was the cause of the rebellion against me at the waters of Meribah. Take Aaron and his son Eleazar, and bring them up Mount Hor; strip Aaron of his vestments, and put them on his son Eleazar. Aaron shall be gathered to his people and shall die there.” Moses did as the Lord had commanded; they went up Mount Hor in the sight of the whole congregation. Moses stripped Aaron of his vestments and put them on his son Eleazar, and Aaron died there on the top of the mountain. 

When the congregation saw that Aaron had died, all the houses of Israel mourned for Aaron thirty days. From Mount Hor we set out by the way to the Red Sea, to go around the land of Edom, but the people became discouraged on the way. They came to Moses and said, “We have sinned by speaking against the Lord and against you; pray to the Lord to take away the serpents from us.” Moses, still in mourning, became frustrated and he complained to the Lord, “Why have you treated your servant so badly? Why have I not found favor in your sight, that you lay the burden of all this people on me? Did I conceive all this people? Did I give birth to them, that you should say to me, ‘Carry them in your bosom as a wet nurse carries a nursing child, to the land that you promised on oath to their ancestors’? If this is the way you are going to treat me, put me to death at once—if I have found favor in your sight—and do not let me see my misery.” So Moses made a serpent of bronze and put it upon a pole, and whenever a serpent bit someone, that person would look at the serpent of bronze and live. Then the Lord became very angry, and the Lord said to Moses, “Because of your anger you did not trust in me, you have complained against me before the eyes of the Israelites, therefore you shall not bring this assembly into the land that I have given them.” 

We set out and camped in Oboth. Then we set out from Oboth and camped at Iye-abarim, in the wilderness bordering Moab toward the sunrise. From Iye-abarim we set out and camped at Dibon-gad. Then from Dibon-gad we set out and camped at Almon-diblathaim. From Almon-diblathaim we set out and camped in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo. 

Then Moses sent messengers to King Sihon of the Amorites, saying, “Let us pass through your land; we will not turn aside into field or vineyard; we will not drink the water of any well; we will go by the King’s Road until we have passed through your territory.” But Sihon would not allow Israel to pass through his territory. Sihon gathered all his people together and came out against Israel; he came to Jahaz and fought against us there. The Israelite army put him to the sword and took possession of his land from the Arnon to the Jabbok, as far as to the Ammonites, for the boundary of the Ammonites was strong. They plundered all the towns of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all its villages. For Heshbon was the city of King Sihon of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab and captured all his land as far as the Arnon. 

Then they turned and went up the road to Bashan, and King Og of Bashan came out against them, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei. So they killed him, his sons, and all his people, until there was no survivor left, and they took possession of his land. Moab was in great dread of the people and overcome with fear of the Israelites. And Moab said to the elders of Midian, “This horde will now lick up all that is around us, as an ox licks up the grass of the field.” Now Balak son of Zippor was king of Moab at that time. He sent messengers to Balaam son of Beor at Pethor, which is on the Euphrates, in the land of Amaw, to summon him, saying, “A people has come out of Egypt; they have spread over the face of the earth, and they have settled next to me. Come now, curse this people for me, since they are stronger than I; perhaps I shall be able to defeat them and drive them from the land, for I know that whomever you bless is blessed, and whomever you curse is cursed.” 

So the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the fees for divination in their hand, and they came to Balaam and gave him Balak’s message. God came to Balaam and said, “Who are these men with you?” Balaam said to God, “King Balak son of Zippor of Moab has sent me this message: ‘Look, a people has come out of Egypt and has spread over the face of the earth; now come, curse them for me; perhaps I shall be able to fight against them and drive them out.’ ” God said to Balaam, “You shall not go with them; you shall not curse the people, for they are blessed.” So Balaam rose in the morning and said to the officials of Balak, “Go to your own land, for the Lord has refused to let me go with you.” So the officials of Moab rose and went to Balak and said, “Balaam refuses to come with us.”

Once again Balak sent officials, more numerous and more distinguished than these. They came to Balaam and said to him, “Thus says Balak son of Zippor: Do not let anything hinder you from coming to me, for I will surely do you great honor, and whatever you say to me I will do; come, curse this people for me.” But Balaam replied to the servants of Balak, “Although Balak were to give me his house full of silver and gold, I could not go beyond the command of the Lord my God, to do less or more. You also stay here overnight, so that I may learn what more the Lord may say to me.” That night God came to Balaam and said to him, “If the men have come to summon you, get up and go with them, but do only what I tell you to do.” So Balaam got up in the morning, saddled his donkey, and went with the officials of Moab.

When Balak heard that Balaam had come, he went out to meet him at Ir-moab, on the boundary formed by the Arnon, at the farthest point of the boundary. Balak said to Balaam, “Did I not send to summon you? Why did you not come to me? Am I not able to honor you?” Balaam said to Balak, “I have come to you now, but do I have power to say just anything? The word God puts in my mouth, that is what I must say.” Then Balaam went with Balak, and they came to Kiriath-huzoth. Balak sacrificed oxen and sheep and sent them to Balaam and to the officials who were with him.

So Balak said to Balaam, “Come now, I will take you to another place; perhaps it will please God that you may curse them for me from there.” Then Balaam said to Balak, “Stay beside your burnt offerings while I go. Perhaps the Lord will come to meet me. Whatever he shows me I will tell you.” So Balaam came to the top of Peor, where we were camped.  And he met Moses there and Balaam said to him, “Balak has brought me from Aram, the king of Moab from the eastern mountains: ‘Come, curse Jacob for me. Come, denounce Israel!’ How can I curse whom God has not cursed? How can I denounce those whom the Lord has not denounced? Then Balaam told Moses he had met the Angel of the Lord on his way to Moab.

Now Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to bless Israel, so he did not go, as at other times, to look for omens but set his face toward the Lord. Balaam looked up and saw Israel camping tribe by tribe. Then the spirit of God came upon him, and he uttered, “The oracle of Balaam son of Beor, the oracle of the man whose eye is clear, the oracle of one who hears the words of God, who sees the vision of the Almighty, who falls down but with eyes uncovered: I see him but not now; I behold him but not near—a star shall come out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of Israel. Then God spoke to him again, and a look of dismay came over him, he uttered his oracle, saying, “Alas, who shall live when God does this? But ships shall come from Kittim and shall afflict Asshur and Eber, and he also shall perish forever.” Then Balaam got up and went back to his place, and Balak also went his way.

When the Israelite army received word that Balaam was called by the Moabites and Midianites to curse the Israelites, the commanders said to themselves, “Arm some of your number for the war, so that they may go against Midian, to execute the Lord’s vengeance on Midian." Just then one of the Israelites came and brought a Midianite woman into his family, in the sight of the whole congregation of the Israelites, while the army was standing at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting. When Phinehas son of Eleazar, son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he got up and left the congregation. Taking a spear in his hand, he went after the Israelite man into the tent and pierced the two of them, the Israelite and the woman, through the belly. 

Then Phinehas spoke to the congregation saying, “Harass the Midianites, and defeat them, for they have harassed you. Each of you shall kill any of your people who have defiled themselves in the presence of Balaam at Peor. Take all the chiefs of the people and impale them in the sun before the Lord, in order that the fierce anger of the Lord may turn away from Israel.” Phinehas son of Eleazar the priest then sent them to war, a thousand from the tribes, along with the vessels of the sanctuary and the trumpets for sounding the alarm in his hand. 

The army took the women of Midian and their little ones captive, and they plundered all their cattle, their flocks, and all their goods. All their towns where they had settled, and all their encampments, they burned, but they took all the spoil and all the plunder, both people and animals. Thus Israel yoked itself to Baal at Peor, and the Lord’s anger was kindled against Israel. They killed the kings of Midian: Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba, the five kings of Midian, in addition to others who were slain by them, and they also killed Balaam son of Beor with the sword. Then Phinehas proclaimed, “Thus says the Lord 'Phinehas son of Eleazar, son of Aaron the priest, has turned back my wrath from the Israelites by manifesting such zeal among them on my behalf that in my jealousy I did not consume the Israelites. Therefore I hereby grant him my covenant of the priest. It shall be for him and for his descendants after him a covenant of perpetual priesthood, because he was zealous for his God and made atonement for the Israelites.’ ”

Moses became angry with the officers of the army who had come from service in the war. And Moses said to the judges of Israel, “Each of you shall cut off your people who have yoked themselves to Phinehas. A brood of sinners has risen in place of their fathers, to increase the Lord’s fierce anger against Israel! If you following him (Phinehas), you will destroy all this people.” As soon as he finished speaking all these words, the ground under them was split apart. The earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up, along with their households—those commanders and all the goods they plundered. So they with all that belonged to them went down alive into Sheol; the earth closed over them, and they perished from the midst of the assembly. 

All Israel around them fled at their outcry, for they said, “The earth will swallow us, too!” Then Moses said to them, "For the trickery with which they deceived you in the affair of Peor, and the sacrifice of Cozbi, the daughter of a leader of Midian, their sister; is a plague upon the Midianites that resulted from bowing to your golden calf. You shall not pollute the land in which you live, for blood pollutes the land, and no expiation can be made for the land for the blood that is shed in it, except by the blood of the one who shed it. Phinehas shall make atonement for all the congregation of the Israelites, and they shall be forgiven; for it was unintentional. They shall bring an offering by fire to the Lord, and their purification offering before the Lord, for their error. If he does so, all the congregation of the Israelites shall be forgiven because the whole people was involved in the error.

Phinehas said to the troops who had gone to battle, “This is the statute of the law that the Lord has commanded Moses: Camp outside the camp seven days, whoever of you has killed any person or touched a corpse; purify yourselves on the third and on the seventh day. Gold, silver, bronze, iron, tin, and lead—everything that can withstand fire, you shall pass through fire, and it shall be clean. Nevertheless, it shall also be purified with the water for purification, and whatever cannot withstand fire, you shall pass through the water. You must wash your clothes on the seventh day, and you shall be clean; afterward you may come into the camp. The priests and the heads of the ancestral houses of the congregation shall make an inventory of the plunder captured, both gold and animal. Divide the plunder into two parts, gold shall be the warrior's who went out to battle and animals divided among the congregation. From the share of the warriors who went out to battle you shall give your plunder to Eleazar the priest as atonement to the Lord. Thus, half of the plunder, each shekel will go to the sanctuary." So Moses and Eleazar the priest received the gold from the soldiers and brought it into the Tent of Meeting as ransom for the Israelites before the Lord.

Then Eleazar the priest spoke with the Israelites in the plains of Moab by the Jordan opposite Jericho, saying, “Take a census of the people. You shall take possession of the land and settle in it, for God has given you the land to possess. To these the land shall be apportioned for inheritance according to the number of names. But the land shall be apportioned by lot; according to the names of their ancestral tribes they shall inherit. Their inheritance shall be apportioned according to lot between the larger and the smaller.” Among the chiefs, elders, and judges there was not one of those enrolled by Moses and Aaron the priest, who had enrolled the Israelites in the wilderness of Sinai, except myself and Joshua son of Nun.

Now the Reubenites and the Gadites saw that the land of Jazer and the land of Gilead was a good place for cattle, the Gadites and the Reubenites came and spoke to Moses, to Eleazar the priest, and to the leaders of the congregation, saying, “Ataroth, Dibon, Jazer, Nimrah, Heshbon, Elealeh, Sebam, Nebo, and Beon—the land that the army subdued—is a land for cattle, and your servants now have cattle.” They continued, “If we have found favor in your sight, let this land be given to your servants for a possession. We will not return to our homes until all the Israelites have obtained their inheritance. We will not inherit with them on the other side of the Jordan and beyond, because our inheritance has come to us on this side of the Jordan to the east.” 

So Moses said to them, “If you do this then after that you may return and be free of obligation to the Lord and to Israel, and this land shall be your possession before the Lord. Build towns for your little ones and folds for your flocks, but do what you have promised.” The Gadites and the Reubenites answered, saying, “As the Lord has spoken to your servants, so we will do. We will cross over before the Lord into the land of Canaan, but the possession of our inheritance shall remain with us on this side of the Jordan.”

In the plains of Moab by the Jordan opposite Jericho, the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, “Command the Israelites to give, from their inheritance, cities for the priests to live in; you shall also give to the Levites pasturelands surrounding the cities. The cities shall be theirs to live in, and their pasturelands shall be for their cattle, for their livestock, and for all their animals. The cities that you designate shall be six cities of refuge for you: you shall designate three cities beyond the Jordan, and three cities in the land of Canaan, to be cities of refuge. These six cities shall serve as refuge for the Israelites, for the resident or transient alien among them, so that anyone who is cut off from the community may flee there. The pasturelands of the city, which you shall give to the Levites, shall reach from the wall of the city outward a thousand cubits all around. You shall measure, outside the city, for the east side two thousand cubits, for the south side two thousand cubits, for the west side two thousand cubits, and for the north side two thousand cubits, with the city in the middle; this shall belong to them as pastureland for their city." 

So Moses gave command concerning them to Eleazar the priest, to Joshua son of Nun, and to the heads of the ancestral houses of the Israelite tribes. Then the Lord said to Moses, “Take Joshua son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay your hand upon him; You shall give him some of your authority, so that all the congregation of the Israelites may obey. Have him stand before Eleazar the priest and all the congregation and commission him in their sight." So Moses did as the Lord commanded him. He took Joshua and had him stand before Eleazar the priest and the whole congregation; he laid his hands on him and commissioned him, as the Lord had directed through Moses. Then the Lord said to Moses, “Go up this mountain of the Abarim range, and see the land that I have given to the Israelites. When you have seen it, you also shall be gathered to your people, as your brother Aaron was."

Chapter 8.4
The Promised Land
By: Caleb son of Jephunneh 

After the death of Moses, the servant of the Lord, the Lord spoke to Joshua son of Nun saying, “My servant Moses is dead. Now proceed to cross the Jordan into the land that I am giving you, and to the Israelites. No one shall be able to stand against you all the days of your life. As I was with Moses, so I will be with you; I will not fail you or forsake you. Only be strong and very courageous, being careful to act in accordance with all the law that my servant Moses commanded you; do not turn from it to the right hand or to the left, so that you may be successful wherever you go."

At that time the Lord said to Joshua, “Make flint knives and circumcise the Israelites." So Joshua made flint knives and circumcised the Israelites. For the Israelites traveled forty years in the wilderness, until all the warriors who came out of Egypt perished, not having listened to the voice of the Lord. To them the Lord swore that he would not let them see the land that he had sworn to their ancestors to give us, a land flowing with milk and honey. So it was their children, whom he raised up in their place, that Joshua circumcised, for they were uncircumcised because they had not been circumcised on the way. When the circumcising of all the nation was done, they remained in their places in the camp until they were healed. Then the Lord said to Joshua, “Today I have rolled away your disgrace."

Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, “Pass through the camp and command the people, ‘Prepare your provisions, for in three days you are to cross over this Jordan, to go in to take possession of the land that the Lord your God gives you to possess.’ ” They answered Joshua, “All that you have commanded us we will do, and wherever you send us we will go. Just as we obeyed Moses in all things, so we will obey you. Only may the Lord your God be with you, as he was with Moses! Whoever rebels against your orders and disobeys your words, whatever you command, shall be cut off from Israel."

Then Joshua said to the people, “Sanctify yourselves, for tomorrow the Lord will do wonders among you.” The Lord said to Joshua, “This day I will begin to exalt you in the sight of all Israel, so that they may know that I will be with you as I was with Moses.You are the one who shall command the priests who bear the ark of the covenant. At the end of the day, the officers went through the camp and commanded the people, “When you see the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God being carried by the priests, then you shall set out from your place. Follow it." To the priests Joshua said, “Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass on in front of the people.” So they took up the ark of the covenant and went in front of the people. The next day Joshua told the people, "When the soles of the feet of the priests who bear the ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the earth, come to rest in the waters of the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan flowing from above shall be cut off; they shall stand in a single heap.” 

When the people set out from their tents to cross over the Jordan, the priests bearing the ark of the covenant were in front of the people. So when those who bore the ark had come to the Jordan and the feet of the priests bearing the ark were dipped in the edge of the water, the waters flowing from above stood still, rising up in a single heap far off at Adam, the city that is beside Zarethan, while those flowing toward the sea of the Arabah, the Dead Sea, were wholly cut off. Then the people crossed over opposite Jericho. While all Israel were crossing over on dry ground, the priests who bore the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood firmly on dry ground in the middle of the Jordan, until the entire nation finished crossing over the Jordan.

On that day the Lord exalted Joshua in the sight of all Israel, and they stood in awe of him, as they had stood in awe of Moses all the days of his life. Then the Lord said, “Command the priests who bear the ark of the covenant to come up out of the Jordan.” Joshua therefore commanded the priests, “Come up out of the Jordan.” When the priests bearing the ark of the covenant of the Lord came up from the middle of the Jordan and the soles of the priests’ feet touched dry ground, the waters of the Jordan returned to their place and overflowed all its banks, as before. The people came up out of the Jordan on the tenth day of the first month, and they camped in Gilgal on the east border of Jericho. 

Now Jericho was shut up inside and out; no one came out, and no one went in. The Lord said to Joshua, “See, I have handed Jericho over to you." So Joshua son of Nun summoned the priests and said to them, “Take up the ark of the covenant and have two priests carry the trumpets of silver in front of the ark of the Lord.” To the people he said, “Go forward and march around the city; You shall not shout or let your voice be heard, nor shall you utter a word until the day I tell you to shout. Then you shall shout.” So the ark of the Lord went around the city, circling it once, and they came into the camp and spent the night in the camp. Then Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the Lord. The priests carrying the two silver trumpets before the ark of the Lord passed on, blowing the trumpets continually. The people went before them, and the rear guard came after the ark of the Lord, while the trumpets blew continually. 

On the second day they marched around the city once and then returned to the camp. They did this for six days. On the seventh day they rose early, at dawn, and marched around the city in the same manner seven times. It was only on that day that they marched around the city seven times. And at the seventh time, when the priests had blown the trumpets, Joshua said to the people, “Shout! For the Lord has given you the city. So the people shouted, and the trumpets were blown. As soon as the people heard the sound of the trumpets, they raised a great shout, and the people charged straight ahead into the city and captured it. Joshua then pronounced this oath, saying, “Cursed before the Lord be anyone who tries to build this city, Jericho! At the cost of his firstborn he shall lay its foundation, and at the cost of his youngest he shall set up its gates!” So the Lord was with Joshua, and his fame was in all the land.

Then the Lord said to Joshua, “You shall do to Ai as you did to Jericho, except that you may take its spoil and for yourselves. Do not fear or be dismayed; take all the men with you, and go up to Ai." In the morning Joshua rose early and mustered the people and went up, with the elders of Israel, before the city of Ai. There was not a man left in Ai, they left the city open for Israel. Then the Lord said to Joshua, “Stretch out the sword that is in your hand toward Ai, for I will give it into your hand.” And Joshua stretched out the sword that was in his hand toward the city. As soon as he stretched out his hand, the people rose quickly out of their place and rushed forward. They entered the city, took it, and at once set the city on fire. But the Israelites broke faith in regard to the devoted things: they burned the plunder devoted to Israel and to the Lord. 

Then Joshua tore his clothes and then he said to the elders of Israel, "Proceed to sanctify the people and say, ‘Sanctify yourselves for tomorrow, for the one who burned the devoted things, all that he has shall be burned with fire, for having transgressed the Lord and for having done an outrageous thing in Israel.’ ” Achan, son of Carmi son of Zabdi son of Zerah, answered Joshua, “It was I; I am the one who sinned against the Lord God of Israel. This is what I did: I set fire to Ai." Joshua said, “Why did you bring trouble on us?" Then Joshua and all Israel with him took Achan son of Zerah, and his tent and all that he had, and they brought them up to the Valley of Achor. Then they burned his things with fire, cast stones on them, and raised over them a great heap of stones that remains to this day.

Then Joshua fell to the ground on his face before the ark of the covenant until the evening. The Lord said to Joshua, “Stand up! Why have you fallen on your face? And Joshua said, "Israel has sinned; they have transgressed the covenant of the Lord. They burned the devoted things." Then the Lord said, “My son, you misunderstand, it is not silver or gold I require, nor devoted servants and sacrifices. As I Am devoted to Israel, Israel shall be devoted to me. You must not only follow commandments but understand the covenant, and your priestly kingdom must interpret its intention to remain holy. Or else you remain slaves in a new land." And afterward he read all the words of the covenant and the law, the duties and the festivals, all that is written in the Book of Covenant. There was not a word of all that Moses wrote that Joshua did not read.

When the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and to Ai, the elders and all the inhabitants of the country said, "Take provisions in your hand for the journey; go to meet them, and say to them, 'We are your servants; come now, make a treaty with us. Here is our bread; it was still warm when we took it from our houses as our food for the journey, on the day we set out to come to you, but now, see, it is dry and moldy; these wineskins were new when we filled them, and see, they are burst, and these garments and sandals of ours are worn out from the very long journey.' " So the leaders partook of their provisions and did not ask direction from the Lord. They went to Joshua in the camp at Gilgal. Joshua said to them, “Who are you? And where do you come from?" 

And they said to him and to the Israelites, “Your servants have come from a very far country because of the name of the Lord your God, for we have heard a report of him, of all that he did in Egypt. We have come from a far country, so now make a treaty with us.” So the Israelites set out and reached their cities on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kiriath-jearim. Joshua summoned them and said to them, “Why did you deceive us, saying, ‘We are very far from you,’ while in fact you are living among us? They answered Joshua, “Because it was told to your servants for a certainty that the Lord your God had commanded his servant Moses to give you all the land and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land before you, so we were in great fear for our lives because of you and did this thing. And now we are in your hand: do as it seems good and right in your sight to do to us.” 

Then the Israelites said to the Hivites, “You are not truthful and you live among us; then how can we make a treaty with you?” But all the leaders said to all the congregation, “This is what we will do to them: we will let them live, so that wrath may not come upon us, the Lord commanded Moses to give us an inheritance along with our male kin. So according to the commandment of the Lord they shall give us the inheritance of our father Jacob; Shechem. And the territory from Asher to Michmethath (which is east of Shechem); then the boundary goes along southward to the inhabitants of En-tappuah. The Gibeonites came before the priest Eleazar and Joshua son of Nun and the leaders and said, “You may take the land as your inheritance, only make a treaty with us." Joshua then made peace with them, guaranteeing their lives by a treaty, and the leaders of the congregation swore an oath to them.

When King Adoni-zedek of Jerusalem heard how Joshua had taken Ai and had utterly destroyed it, doing to Ai as he had done to Jericho, and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel and were among them, he became greatly frightened, because Gibeon was a large city, like one of the royal cities, and was larger than Ai, and all its men were warriors. So King Adoni-zedek of Jerusalem sent a message to King Hoham of Hebron, to King Piram of Jarmuth, to King Japhia of Lachish, and to King Debir of Eglon, saying, “Come up and help me, and let us attack Gibeon, for it has made peace with Joshua and with the Israelites.” Then the five kings of the Amorites—the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon—gathered their forces and went up with all their armies and camped against Gibeon and made war against it.

The Gibeonites sent to Joshua at the camp, saying, “Do not abandon your servants; come up to us quickly and save us and help us, for all the kings of the Amorites who live in the hill country are gathered against us.” The Lord said to Joshua, “Do not fear them, for I have handed them over to you; not one of them shall stand before you.” So Joshua went, he and all the fighting force with him. Joshua came upon them suddenly, having marched up all night. And the Lord threw them into a panic before Israel, who chased them by the way of the ascent of Beth-horon, and as far as Azekah and Makkedah. Then Joshua returned to the camp. The bones of Joseph, which the Israelites had brought up from Egypt, he buried in the portion of ground that Jacob had bought from the children of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for one hundred pieces of money; it became an inheritance of the descendants of Ephraim.

Then Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem and summoned the elders, the heads, the judges, and the officers of Israel, and they presented themselves before God. And Joshua said to all the people, “Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, 'Long ago your ancestors—Terah and his sons Abram and Nahor—lived beyond the Euphrates and served other gods. Then I took your father Abraham from beyond the River and led him through all the land of Canaan and made his offspring many. I gave him Isaac, and to Isaac I gave Jacob and Esau. I gave Esau the hill country of Seir to possess, but Jacob and his children went down to Egypt. Then I sent Moses and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt with what I did in its midst, and afterward I brought you out. When I brought your ancestors out of Egypt, they came to the sea, and the Egyptians pursued your ancestors with chariots and horsemen to the Red Sea. When they cried out to the Lord, he put darkness between them and the Egyptians and made the sea open for them, and Israel's eyes saw what I did to Egypt. Afterward Israel lived in the wilderness a long time. Then I brought you to the land of the Amorites, who lived on the other side of the Jordan; they fought with you, and I handed them over to you, and you took possession of their land. Then King Balak son of Zippor of Moab set out to fight against Israel. He invited Balaam son of Beor to curse you, but I would not listen to Balak; therefore Balaam blessed you, so I rescued you out of his hand. When you went over the Jordan and came to Jericho, I sent swarms of hornets ahead of you that drove out before you the two kings of the Amorites; it was not by your sword or by your bow. I gave you a land on which you had not labored and towns that you had not built, and you live in them; you eat the fruit of vineyards and oliveyards that you did not plant. And when the citizens of Canaan fought against you, and I handed them over to you. Now, therefore, revere the Lord and follow him in sincerity and in faithfulness; put away the gods that your ancestors served beyond the River and in Egypt and serve the Lord. Now if you are unwilling to trust the Lord, choose this day whom you will serve, whether the gods your ancestors served in the region beyond the River or the gods of the Amorites in whose land you are living, but as for me and my household, we will serve the Lord.” 

Then the people answered, “Far be it from us that we should forsake the Lord to serve other gods, for it is the Lord our God who brought us and our ancestors up from the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, and who did those great signs in our sight. He protected us along all the way that we went and among all the peoples through whom we passed, and the Lord drove out before us all the peoples, the Amorites who lived in the land. Therefore we also will serve the Lord, for he is our God.” 

But Joshua said to the people, “You cannot serve the Lord, for he is a holy God. He is a jealous God. If you forsake the Lord and serve foreign gods, then he will turn and do you harm and consume you, after having done you good.” And the people said to Joshua, “No, we will not forsake the Lord!” Then Joshua said to the people, “You are witnesses against yourselves that you have chosen the Lord.” And they said, “We are witnesses.” He said, “Then put away the foreign gods that are among you, and incline your hearts to the Lord, the God of Israel.” The people said to Joshua, “The Lord our God we will not forsake, and him we will obey.” So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day and made statutes and ordinances for them at Shechem. Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God, and he took a large stone and set it up there under the oak in the sanctuary of the Lord. 

Joshua said to all the people, “See, this stone shall be a witness against us, for it has heard all the words of the Lord that he spoke to us; therefore it shall be a witness against you if you deal falsely with your God.” When the Lord had given rest to Israel from all their enemies all around and Joshua was old and well advanced in years, Joshua summoned all Israel, their elders and heads, their judges and officers, and said to them, “I am now old and well advanced in years, and you have seen all that the Lord your God has done to all these nations for your sake, for it is the Lord your God who has fought for you. The Lord your God will push them back before you and drive them out of your sight, and you shall possess their land, as the Lord your God promised you. Therefore be very steadfast to observe and do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, turning aside from it neither to the right nor to the left. For the Lord has driven out before you great and strong nations, and as for you, no one has been able to withstand you to this day. One of you puts to flight a thousand, since it is the Lord your God who fights for you, as he promised you. Be very careful, therefore, to love the Lord your God." 

Then Joshua summoned the Reubenites and the Gadites, and said to them, “You have observed all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you and have obeyed me in all that I have commanded you; you have not forsaken your kindred these many days, down to this day, but have been careful to keep the charge of the Lord your God. Beyond the Jordan east of Jericho, appoint Bezer in the wilderness on the tableland, from the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead, from the tribe of Gad, as cities of refuge for the priests. And now the Lord your God has given rest to your kindred, as he promised them; therefore turn and go to your tents in the land where your possession lies, which Moses the servant of the Lord gave you on the other side of the Jordan."

Then Joshua summoned the tribes of Joseph and said, "Now to the tribe of Manasseh, Moses had given possession of Succoth in Bashan, but to the other half of the tribe, possession has been given to my fellow Ephraimites in the land west of the Jordan. But set aside Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim and Golan in Bashan as they have been given to the priests. Then the people of Judah came to Joshua, and I, Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, said to him, “You know what the Lord said to Moses the man of God in Kadesh-barnea concerning you and me." Then Joshua blessed me and gave the hill county south of Ephraim to Judah as inheritance. "But," he said "the town of Kiriath-arba, that is Hebron, will be given to the priests. And to Caleb son of Jephunneh, the cave purchased by Abraham and the pasturelands around it, will be given for an inheritance."

When Joshua dismissed the people, the Israelites all went to their own inheritances to take possession of the land. The people served the Lord all the days of Joshua and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great work that the Lord had done for Israel. Joshua son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died at the age of one hundred ten years. So they buried him within the bounds of his inheritance in Timnath-heres, in the hill country of Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash. Eleazar son of Aaron died, and they buried him at Gibeah, the town of his son Phinehas, which had been given him in the hill country of Ephraim. Moreover, that whole generation was gathered to their ancestors, and another generation grew up after them who did not know the Lord or the work that he had done for Israel. One day the Israelites heard that the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh had built an altar opposite the land of Canaan, in the region near the Jordan, across from the Israelites. 

Then the Israelites sent the priest Phinehas son of Eleazar to the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, in the land of Gilead, and with him ten chiefs, one from each of the tribal families of Israel, every one of them the head of a family among the clans of Israel. They came to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, in the land of Gilead, and they said to them, “Thus says the whole congregation of the Lord: What is this treachery that you have committed against the God of Israel in turning away today from following the Lord, by building yourselves an altar today in rebellion against the Lord? Have we not had enough of the sin at Peor, from which even yet we have not cleansed ourselves and for which a plague came upon the congregation of the Lord, that you must turn away today from following the Lord? If you rebel against the Lord today, he will be angry with the whole congregation of Israel tomorrow. But now, if your land is unclean, cross over into the Lord’s land, where the Lord’s tabernacle now stands, and take for yourselves a possession among us; only do not rebel against the Lord or rebel against us by building yourselves an altar other than the altar of the Lord our God. Did not Achan son of Zerah break faith in the matter of the devoted things, and wrath fell upon all the congregation of Israel?” 

Then the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh said in answer to the heads of the families of Israel, “The Lord, God of gods! The Lord, God of gods! He knows, and let Israel itself know! If it was in rebellion or in breach of faith toward the Lord, do not spare us today for building an altar to turn away from following the Lord, or if we did so to offer burnt offerings or grain offerings or offerings of well-being on it, may the Lord himself take vengeance. No! We did it from fear that in time to come your children might say to our children, ‘What have you to do with the Lord, the God of Israel? For the Lord has made the Jordan a boundary between us and you, you Reubenites and Gadites; you have no portion in the Lord.’ So your children might make our children cease to worship the Lord. And we thought, ‘If this should be said to us or to our descendants in time to come, we could say, “Look at this copy of the altar of the Lord that our ancestors made, not for burnt offerings nor for sacrifice, but to be a witness between us and you.” Far be it from us that we should rebel against the Lord and turn away this day from following the Lord by building an altar for burnt offering, grain offering, or sacrifice other than the altar of the Lord our God that stands before his tabernacle!’ ” When the priest Phinehas and the chiefs of the congregation, the heads of the families of Israel who were with him, heard the words that the Reubenites and the Gadites and the Manassites spoke, they were satisfied. 

The priest Phinehas son of Eleazar said to the Reubenites and the Gadites and the Manassites, “Today we know that the Lord is among us, because you have not committed this treachery against the Lord; now you have saved the Israelites from the hand of the Lord.” Then the priest Phinehas son of Eleazar and the chiefs returned from the Reubenites and the Gadites in the land of Gilead to the land of Canaan, to the Israelites, and brought back word to them. The report pleased the Israelites, and the Israelites blessed God and spoke no more of making war against them, to destroy the land where the Reubenites and the Gadites were settled. The Reubenites and the Gadites called the altar Witness, “For,” they said, “it is a witness between us that the Lord is God.” 

Then the Israelites did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, they abandoned the Lord and served Baal and the priests. Then the Lord raised up judges who delivered them out of the power of those who defiled them. Yet they did not listen even to their judges, for they lusted after wealth and  power and bowed down to them. They soon turned aside from the way in which their ancestors had walked, who had obeyed the commandments of the Lord; they did not follow their example. So the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he said, “Because this nation has transgressed my covenant that I commanded their ancestors and have not obeyed my voice, I will no longer drive out before them any of the nations that Joshua left when he died.” In order to test Israel, whether or not they would take care to walk in the way of the Lord as their ancestors did, the Lord had left those nations, not driving them out at once, and had not handed them over to Joshua.

